THE CODE OF THE CITY OF SANDY SPRINGS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
____________ 
Adopted: March 4, 2008 
Effective: March 4, 2008 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SANDY SPRINGS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Eva Galambos 
(Mayor) 
Douglas MacGinnitie 
(Councilmember, District 1) 
Dianne Fries 
(Councilmember, District 2) 
Rusty Paul 
(Councilmember, District 3) 
Ashley Jenkins 
(Councilmember, District 4) 
Tiberio "Tibby" DeJulio 
(Councilmember, District 5) 
Karen Meinzen McEnerny 
(Councilmember, District 6) 
City Council 
____________ 
John F. McDonough 
City Manager 
____________ 
Wendell Willard 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Christina Rowland 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SANDY SPRINGS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Rusty Paul 
(Mayor) 
John Paulson 
(Councilmember, District 1) 
Steve Soteres 
(Councilmember, District 2) 
Chris Burnett 
(Councilmember, District 3) 
Jody Reichel 
(Councilmember, District 4) 
Tibby DeJulio 
(Councilmember, District 5) 
Andy Bauman 
(Councilmember, District 6) 
City Council 
____________ 
John F. McDonough 
City Manager 
____________ 
Daniel Lee 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Coty Thigpen 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Assistant City Manager Al Crace, City Clerk Christina Rowland, Assistant City Attorney Cecil G. McLendon, Jr., and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 2008. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
STATE OF GEORGIA  COUNTY OF FULTON 
ORDINANCE NO. 2008-03-09 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SANDY SPRINGS, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SANDY SPRINGS, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled The Code of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 117, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 20, 2007, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, confinement at labor for a period of time not to exceed 30 days, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided, with respect to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense and as to other violations, each act is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 20, 2007 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
ORDAINED this 4th day of March, 2008. 
APPROVED: 

ATTEST: 

(seal) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To amend an Act providing for a new charter for the City of Sandy Springs in Fulton County, approved April 15, 2005 (Ga. L. 2005 p. 3515), so as to modify provisions relating to the City of Sandy Springs and the executive and judicial officials of such city; to provide for related matters; to provide for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
SECTION 1. 
An Act providing for a new charter for the City of Sandy Springs in Fulton County, approved April 15, 2005 (Ga. L. 2005 p. 3515), is amended as follows: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this part is the city Charter, being 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 550), page 5359, which repealed the former Charter derived from 2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 35), page 3515. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the charter of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. The City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, in the County of Fulton, and the inhabitants thereof, are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the 'City of Sandy Springs' and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal. 
Sec. 1.02. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Sandy Springs shall be as set forth and described in Appendix A of this charter, and said Appendix A is incorporated into and made a part of this charter. The city manager shall maintain a current map and written legal description of the corporate boundaries of the city, and such map and description shall incorporate any changes which may hereafter be made in such corporate boundaries. 
Sec. 1.03. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Act. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Act or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at-large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing, and building trades to the extent permitted by general law; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the city council, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of stormwater and establishment of a stormwater utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Ethics. To adopt ethics ordinances and regulations governing the conduct of municipal elected officials, appointed officials, and employees, establishing procedures for ethics complaints and setting forth penalties for violations of such rules and procedures; 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(12)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city, to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail, to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(16)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(17)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(18)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(19)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(20)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(21)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, stormwater management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(22)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(26)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, public housing, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city and to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on, public utilities and public services, and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission. 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(34)  Sewer and water fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax and water fees as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; provided, however, that: 
(A)  For all years, the millage rate imposed for ad valorem taxes on real property shall not exceed 4.731 unless a higher limit is recommended by resolution of the city council and approved by the qualified voters of the City of Sandy Springs; 
(B)  For all years, the fair market value of all property subject to taxation shall be determined according to the tax digest of Fulton County, as provided in Code Section 48-5-352 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(C)  For all years, the billing date or dates and due date or due dates for municipal ad valorem taxes shall be the same as for Fulton County ad valorem taxes; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and any listing of particular powers in this charter shall not be held to be exclusive of others or restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.04. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Act. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.01. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of Sandy Springs, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, shall be vested in the mayor and a city council to be composed of six city councilmembers. References in this Act to the terms 'councilmember' shall not include the mayor. 
(b)  The mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city. 
(c)  Each city councilmember shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of his or her respective city council district voting at the elections of the city. For the purpose of electing the six city councilmembers, there shall be six city council districts, designated City Council Districts 1 through 6, as described in Appendix B of this Act and the accompanying Redistricting Plan Components Report, which are attached to and made a part of the charter of the City of Sandy Springs. Each person desiring to offer as a candidate for city councilmember shall designate the city council district for which he or she is offering. 
Sec. 2.02. - Mayor and city councilmembers; election, terms, and qualifications for office. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, the mayor and members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or city councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the area comprising the corporate limits of the City of Sandy Springs for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of the election for mayor or city councilmember, shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service, and shall continue to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Sandy Springs. In addition to the above requirements, no person shall be eligible to serve as a city councilmember representing a city council district unless that person has been a resident of the district such person seeks to represent for a continuous period of at least six months immediately prior to the date of the election for city councilmember and continues to reside in such district during that person's period of service. 
(b)  General municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2005 and quadrennially thereafter. 
(c)  The first mayor and the initial city councilmembers shall take office on December 1, 2005, and shall serve for terms which expire when their successors take office in January of 2010. Thereafter the mayor and city councilmembers shall take office as provided in Code Section 21-2-541.1 of the O.C.G.A. and serve for terms of four years. The initial members and future members of the governing authority shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 2.03. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
The office of mayor or city councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Act or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or city councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election if such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office. If such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor or any city councilmember. 
Sec. 2.04. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Sec. 2.05. - Election by majority vote. 
The candidates for mayor and city councilmember who receive a majority of the votes cast in the applicable election shall be elected to a term of office. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in said election, a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes. Such run-off shall be held at the time specified by state election law, unless such run-off date is postponed by court order. 
Sec. 2.06. - Applicability of general laws; qualifying; other provisions. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended. Except as otherwise provided by this Act, the city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate, including but not limited to the establishment of qualifying fees, to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 2.07. - Compensation and expenses. 
Through December 31, 2012, the starting salary of the mayor shall be not less than $25,000.00 and the starting salary for each city councilmember shall be not less than $12,000.00. Effective January 1, 2014, the starting salary of the mayor shall not be less than $40,000.00 and the starting salary for each city councilmember shall not be less than $18,000.00. Such salary shall be paid from municipal funds in monthly installments. The city council shall have authority to vote annually to raise the mayor and city councilmembers' salaries in an amount consistent with the Consumer Price Index or similar inflationary index. The city council may provide by ordinance for the provision of insurance, retirement, workers' compensation, and other employee benefits to the mayor and members of the city council and may provide by ordinance for the reimbursement of expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor and members of the city council in carrying out their official duties. 
Sec. 2.08. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof including inquiries and investigation into the services provided to the city by contractors or other persons doing business with the city. For such purpose, the city council may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.09. - Meetings and mayor pro tempore. 
(a)  The city council shall meet on the first working day in January immediately following each regular municipal election. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor-elect and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected mayor and city councilmembers by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths. The oath shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
'I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of [city councilmember or mayor as the case may be] of the City of Sandy Springs, and will to the best of my ability support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia, and the charter, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Sandy Springs. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident of my district and the City of Sandy Springs for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal charter. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Sandy Springs to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof.' 
(b)  Following the induction of the mayor and city councilmembers, the city council, by a majority vote of the city councilmembers, shall elect a city councilmember to be mayor pro tempore, who shall serve for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence, except that the mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote as a city councilmember and may not exercise the mayor's prerogative to vote in the case of a tie. During the mayor's disability or absence, the mayor pro tempore may veto any action of city council. If the mayor pro tempore is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one of the remaining city councilmembers, chosen by the members present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the mayor's duties in the same manner as the mayor pro tempore. 
(c)  The city council shall, at least once a month, hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The city council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(d)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on the call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be delivered to all members of the city council and the mayor personally, by registered mail, or by electronic means, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to city councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all city councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by the mayor or a city councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice. The notice of such special meeting shall state what business is to be transacted at the special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
Sec. 2.10. - Quorum; voting. 
Four city councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business for the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the yeas and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but on the request of any member there shall be a roll-call vote. In order for any ordinance, resolution, motion, or other action of the city council to be adopted, the measure must receive at least three affirmative votes and must receive the affirmative votes of a majority of those voting. No member of the city council shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the city council for official action except when such member of city council has a conflict of interest which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. Any member of the city council present and eligible to vote on a matter and refusing to do so for any reason other than a properly disclosed and recorded conflict of interest shall be deemed to have acquiesced or concurred with the members of the majority who did vote on the question involved. The mayor shall vote only in the case of a tie or in the case where his or her vote will provide the third affirmative vote required for approval of a matter. 
Sec. 2.11. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Sandy Springs as provided by Article I of this charter. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Sandy Springs and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Sec. 2.12. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except for the office of city manager, the city council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as they shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The city council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the city council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Except for the services provided by the mayor, city council, and city manager, the city council may establish contracts for services with private or public entities for services authorized by this Act or the laws of this state. 
Sec. 2.13. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be nominated by the mayor and be confirmed by the city council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable state law. 
(b)  No member of any board, commission, or authority of the city shall hold any elective office in the city. City councilmembers and the mayor, however, may serve as ex officio members of such boards, commissions, or authorities, without a vote. 
(c)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or any applicable state law. 
(d)  No member of any board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she shall have executed and filed with the designated officer of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the city council and administered by the mayor. 
(e)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of a majority of the members of the city council. 
(f)  Members of boards, commissions, and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the designated officer of the city. 
Sec. 2.14. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance and resolution shall be introduced in writing, and the city council shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or amend the same. After the title of any proposed resolution or ordinance is read at a city council meeting, it may be approved and passed at such time by the city council. 
(b)  The catchlines of sections of this charter or any ordinance printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and: 
(1)  Shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or as any part of the section; and 
(2)  Shall not be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted unless expressly provided to the contrary. 
Furthermore, the chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Act shall not be deemed to govern, limit, or modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any chapter, article, or section hereof. 
(c)  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business, including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. Such rules may include punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the city council. 
Sec. 2.15. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor. 
(a)  Every ordinance, resolution, and other action adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly to the mayor. Except for city council approval of appointments to committees, boards, and commissions, the employment of any appointed officer, internal affairs, or matters which must be approved by the voters, the mayor may veto any action adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The veto must be exercised no later than the next regular city council meeting following the meeting at which the action was taken. If an action is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council a written statement of the reasons for the mayor's veto. 
(c)  An action vetoed by the mayor shall automatically be on the agenda at the next regular meeting of the city council for reconsideration. If the minimum number of city councilmembers necessary to vote on overriding the veto are not present, the action may be continued until the next meeting at which the minimum number of city councilmembers are present. Such action shall not become effective unless it is readopted by the affirmative votes of at least four members of city council within 60 days of the veto. A veto may be overturned and a measure adopted by a vote of four or more city councilmembers. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance or resolution. The approved part or parts of any ordinance or resolution making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved or reduced shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in this charter. 
(e)  If an ordinance or resolution has been signed by the mayor, it shall become effective. If an ordinance or resolution is neither approved nor disapproved by the mayor by the next regular meeting of the city council, it shall become effective. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 3.01. - Powers and duties of the mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city government, a member of and the presiding officer of the city council, and responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of the city's affairs. The mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, and franchises in the city. The mayor may conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's affairs and shall have such powers and duties as specified in this charter or as may be provided by ordinance consistent with this charter. 
(b)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the advocate of policy; 
(3)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, resolutions, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(4)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Vote on any motion, resolution, ordinance, or other question before the city council only as provided in Section 2.10 of this charter and vote on any matter before a committee on which he or she serves; 
(6)  Obtain short term loans in the name of the city when authorized by the city council to do so; 
(7)  Appoint councilmembers to review the functions of the various departments of the city and report to the mayor and full city council regarding the same; 
(8)  Require the city manager to meet with him or her at a time and place designated for consultation and advice upon the affairs of the city; 
(9)  Name qualified residents of the city to boards and commissions with approval of the city council; 
(10)  Make recommendations with respect to employment or termination decisions of city employees; 
(11)  Prepare or have prepared an agenda for each meeting of the city council which shall include all business submitted by the mayor, any councilmember, the city manager, and the city attorney; and 
(12)  Fulfill and perform such other duties as are imposed by this charter and duly adopted ordinances. 
Sec. 3.02. - City manager; appointment, qualification, and compensation. 
The mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the city council, for an indefinite term an officer whose title shall be the 'city manager' and the city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city manager shall be appointed without regard to political beliefs and solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her educational background and actual experience in, and knowledge of, the duties of office as hereinafter prescribed. 
Sec. 3.03. - City manager; chief administrative officer. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the government of the City of Sandy Springs. Except as approved by the mayor and city council, the city manager must devote all of his or her working time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the city over which said officer has jurisdiction. 
Sec. 3.04. - City manager; powers and duties enumerated. 
The city manager shall have the power, and it shall be his or her duty to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  Appoint and employ all necessary employees of the city, provided that excepted from the power of this appointment are those officers and employees who by this Act are appointed or elected by the city council or departments not under the jurisdiction of the city manager; 
(3)  Remove employees employed by said officer without the consent of the city council and without assigning any reason therefore; 
(4)  Exercise supervision and control of all departments and all divisions created in this charter or that may hereafter be created by the city council except as otherwise provided in this Act; 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the city council with a right to take part in the discussions, but having no vote. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(6)  Recommend to the city council, after prior review and comment by the mayor, for adoption such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient; 
(7)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be forthwith to take such steps as are necessary to protect and enforce the same; 
(8)  Make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the city as to matters within said officer's jurisdiction to the extent that such contracts are funded in the city's budget, except such as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no contract purchase or obligation requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the city council; 
(9)  Act as budget officer to prepare and submit to the city council, after review and comment by the mayor, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; 
(10)  Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(11)  Make a full written report to the city council on the first of each month showing the operations and expenditures of each department of the city government for the preceding month, and a synopsis of such reports shall be published by the city clerk; 
(12)  Fix all salaries and compensation of city employees in accordance with the city budget and the city pay and classification plan; and 
(13)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Act or required by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 3.05. - City council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.08 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction or supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 3.06. - City manager; removal. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution removing the city manager and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a city council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  The city council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of four of its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the city manager, if he or she has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he or she has requested one. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal and, unless he or she has been convicted of a felony at that time, he or she shall be given not less than 60 days' severance pay. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency. 
(c)  If the city manager becomes disabled and is unable to carry out the duties of the office or if the city manager dies, the acting city manager shall perform the duties of the city manager until the city manager's disability is removed or until the city manager is replaced. Removal of the city manager because of disability shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 3.07. - Acting city manager. 
(a)  The city manager may designate in writing any administrative employee of the city who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager during the city manager's temporary absence from the city or during the city manager's disability. If such designation has not been made and the city manager is absent from the city or unable to perform the duties of the office or to make such designation, the city council may, by resolution, appoint any qualified administrative employee of the city to perform the powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until the city manager shall return to the city, the disability ceases, or the city council appoints a new city manager. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the city council may designate a person as acting city manager, who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until a city manager is appointed. 
Sec. 3.08. - City attorney. 
The mayor shall nominate and the city council shall confirm by majority vote of the city council a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be deemed appropriate, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, other officers, and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. The city attorney shall review all contracts of the city but shall not have the power to bind the city. 
Sec. 3.09. - City clerk. 
The mayor may appoint a city clerk, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the city council, to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council; to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city; and to perform such duties as may be required by law or ordinance or as the mayor or city manager may direct. 
Sec. 3.10. - Tax collector. 
The mayor may appoint a tax collector, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the city council, to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city; and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.11. - City accountant. 
The mayor may appoint a city accountant, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the city council, to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.12. - Consolidation of functions. 
The city manager, with the approval of the city council, may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector, and city accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The city manager may also, with the approval of the city council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of the appointment of other persons to perform the same. 
Sec. 3.13. - Position classification and pay plans; employment at will. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and a pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Said plan may apply to all employees of the City of Sandy Springs and any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted by the city council, neither the city council nor the city manager shall increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except in conformity with such pay plan or pursuant to an amendment of said pay plan duly adopted by the city council. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all employees of the city shall be subject to removal or discharge, with or without cause, at any time. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4.01. - Creation. 
There is established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Sandy Springs which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law, including ordinances of the city; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of, and in accordance with, the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. When convened, the municipal court shall be presided over by a judge of the court. 
Sec. 4.02. - Judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he or she shall have attained the age of 25 years and shall have been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for a minimum of three years. 
(b)  All judges shall be appointed by resolution of the city council and shall serve for a term of four years. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the city council by adoption of a resolution. The position of judge created in this article shall not be a full-time position, and the person serving in said position may engage in the private practice of law; provided, however, a judge may not appear and represent a client before the court. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of his or her office, the appointed judges shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state declaring that he or she will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(d)  A judge of the municipal court shall serve for the designated term but may be removed from the position by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council or upon action taken by the State Judicial Qualifications Commission for: 
(1)  Willful misconduct in office; 
(2)  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties; 
(3)  Habitual intemperance; 
(4)  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute; or 
(5)  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. 
Sec. 4.03. - Administration. 
(a)  The position of clerk of the court is created. The clerk shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(b)  The clerk of the court shall be responsible for all record keeping of the court and bill keeping and collection of all fines received by the court. 
(c)  In addition, the clerk of the court shall serve as administrator of the court, supervising all personnel of the court, setting times and dates for convening of the court, preparing the court docket, scheduling of judges to preside over the court sessions, and for such other services as may be assigned by resolution or ordinance of the council. 
Sec. 4.04. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Sandy Springs and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or imprisonment for 15 days. The municipal court may impose punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction to the full extent allowed by state law. 
(b)  The council shall have authority to establish a schedule of reasonable fees to defray the cost of operation. 
Sec. 4.05. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Fulton County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.06. - Rules for court. 
The judges, by majority vote, shall have authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper for addressing the operations of the municipal court. The clerk of the court, as administrator of the court, shall prepare reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. All rules shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

Sec. 5.01. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 5.02. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide, by ordinance, the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 5.03. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall, after review and comment by the mayor, submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. With the review of the mayor, the budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 5.04. - Action by city council on budget. 
The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget, as finally amended and adopted, must provide for all expenditures required by law, or by other provisions of this charter, and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues, constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
Sec. 5.05. - Audits. 
(a)  There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
(b)  As a minimum, all audits and budgets of the city shall satisfy the requirements of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., relating to local government audits and budgets. 
Sec. 5.06. - Homestead exemptions. 
Any homestead exemptions applicable to ad valorem taxes levied by the city shall be as provided by Act of the General Assembly pursuant to Article VII, Section II, Paragraph II of the Georgia Constitution. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.01. - Effective dates. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 6.02. - Charter commission. 
At the first regularly scheduled city council meeting 15 years after the inception of the City of Sandy Springs, the mayor and city council shall call for a charter commission to review the city's experience and recommend to the General Assembly any changes to the city charter. Members of the charter commission shall be appointed as follows: one by the mayor, one by the city council, and one by each member of the Georgia House of Representatives and Senate whose district lies wholly or partially within the corporate boundaries of Sandy Springs. All members of the charter commission must reside in Sandy Springs. The commission must complete the recommendations within six months of its creation. 
Sec. 6.03. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 6.06. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
APPENDIX A. - [CORPORATE LIMITS] 
The corporate limits of the City of Sandy Springs shall consist of the following described territory of Fulton County: 
Beginning at the northwest corner of the City of Atlanta, as the boundaries of said city existed on January 1, 2005, at the point where the northerly city limit line of said city intersects the westerly county line of Fulton County and the Chattahoochee River, running thence generally easterly along the said northerly city limit line of the City of Atlanta, following the meanderings thereof, to the point where said line intersects the Fulton-DeKalb County line; run thence northerly, generally easterly, and generally northerly along the easterly county line of Fulton County to the point where the Fulton-Gwinnett County line intersects the Chattahoochee River; run thence generally west and southwest along the southern bank of said river, following the meanderings thereof, to the point of beginning. The corporate limits of the City of Sandy Springs shall also consist of properties, if any, annexed by local ordinance. 
APPENDIX B. - [COUNCIL DISTRICTS] 
Council Districts 1 through 6 shall consist of the described territory of the City of Sandy Springs attached to this Act and made a part thereof and further identified as "Plan: Sandy Springs-Prop1-2013, Plan Type: Local, Administrator: Sandy Springs, User: bak. 
When used in such attachment, terms shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03-03, 4-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Attachment to Ord. No. 2013-03-03 is incorporated herein by reference and is on file with the city. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of ordinance amendments to the Charter. 

 
GEORGIA LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Charter. 

 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 1, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
State Law reference— Duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Applicability. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
(b)  Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(1)  The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)  In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)  All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(4)  Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions on the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provisions imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
(c)  Definitions and conventions. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the city Charter, as amended. 
City. The term "city" refers to the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
City clerk. The term "city clerk" refers to that employee of the City of Sandy Springs charged with keeping the minute book of the city. 
City council and council. The terms "council" and "city council" refer to the city council of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" refers to The Code of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first and last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday, and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either … or," or "neither … nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The terms "either … or" and "neither … nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Fulton County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Fire department. The term "fire department" refers to the Fulton County fire department or the City of Sandy Springs fire department, whichever provides services to the City of Sandy Springs. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. A word importing one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, except where inappropriate. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, officers, etc. References to officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies by title only shall be construed as referring to the officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The term "person" includes individuals and any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, body politic and corporate, or any combination thereof. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Police. The term "police" refers to the police department or police chief of the City of Sandy Springs. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, court, circle, way, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto and any area owned or dedicated as public rights-of-way within the city. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days, unless otherwise specified. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, numbers, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 2, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references and state law references and other references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(d)  References in city forms, documents, citations, and regulations to city ordinances codified in this Code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, §§ 3, 10), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Catchlines, § 2.14. 
Sec. 1-4. - Exercise of powers. 
The powers of the city may be exercised as provided by the Charter, by the city, and by the parties with whom the city contracts for municipal services. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceedings pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, § 4), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ___ of The Code of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ___, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, § 5), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ through ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, § 6), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any ordinance book or minute book, or any notice posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other document or record of the municipal government of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, § 8), 12-19-2006) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared inapplicable in any situation by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment or degree shall not affect the applicability of such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, and section to other situations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, § 2), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 1-10. - Penalties for violation of Code. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Violation of this Code means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a violation of this Code by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a violation of this Code, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  The phrase "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the city to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the city officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, confinement at labor for a period of time not to exceed 30 days, or any combination thereof. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  With respect to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  As to other violations, each act is a separate offense. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(h)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(i)  If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with the laws of the state, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 3, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Authority to impose jail sentences and community service, § 1.03(b)(15); authority to impose penalties for violation of ordinances, § 1.03(b)(23); maximum penalty for contempt of municipal court, § 4.04(a). 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; maximum penalties which may be imposed by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1(c) and 36-32-5; additional penalties in certain traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, § 7), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges not inconsistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, or providing retirement, disability or death benefits for officials, officers or employees of the city or providing personnel policies; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance and any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(14)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(15)  Any resolution of the city not in conflict with this Code. 
All such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-93, § 1(ch. 1, art. 4, § 9), 12-19-2006) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Open records policy. 
The Open Records Policy, as adopted and amended by the city, is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-03, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 2006-02-15, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 2-2. - Records management plan. 
(a)  Adoption of records management plan. Pursuant to the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., the city adopts the records management plan and record retention schedules for local government recommended by the Georgia Secretary of State as amended from time to time by future resolutions of the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Video records. All video tapes, other than video tapes taken from patrol car video cameras, which are taken from video cameras utilized by the city shall be retained for a period consistent with system capacity, but in no event less than 72 hours. If the records management plan administrator is notified in writing that a video record contains information relevant to an incident, investigation, or otherwise, such video record shall be retained for a period of five years. 
(c)  Records management plan administrator. The city clerk is designated as the person responsible for administration of the records management plan and shall coordinate all records management for the city including storage, archiving, and destruction of records. 
(d)  Maintenance and security of records. Records shall be maintained according to approved retention schedules. No record shall be destroyed except as provided in the approved retention schedule; provided, however, a written record may be destroyed if it is otherwise preserved by means of microfiche, scanning, or other reliable photographic or digital means. Changes to the retention schedules shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. The city manager shall immediately prepare guidelines for the maintenance and security of all records covered by this section, and such guidelines shall, upon completion, become a part of the records management plan for the city. 
(e)  Open Records Act. All requests for records made under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., shall be made pursuant to the City of Sandy Springs open records policy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12-61, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 2-3. - Variances for city or city-sponsored projects. 
For variances on any city projects whether part of the capital improvement project (CIP) plan, work conducted on city property by the city or its designee, or any other city or city-sponsored projects, any request shall be considered solely by the city council. Any such application shall otherwise follow all notice and hearing criteria required by the relevant Code section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04-008, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-04,008, § 1, adopted April 6, 2010, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-2. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 2-3 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-4—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-19. - Reimbursement and travel. 
(a)  Reasonable expenses. The mayor and councilmembers shall be reimbursed for their own reasonable travel expenses incurred in connection with city business related to travel outside the city and those cities that share borders with the city. 
(b)  Overnight travel. The city shall reimburse the mayor or councilmembers for actual expenses of meals incurred in connection with overnight travel, lodging, ground transportation, and incidental expenses incurred in connection with city business. 
(c)  Expense reports. Within 60 days after incurring the aforementioned expenditures, the mayor or councilmembers shall file with the city manager a signed travel expense form setting forth the reasonable expenses incurred for which city payment is sought. Original receipts documenting each expense must accompany the form, except for reasonable and customary out-of-pocket expenses such as tolls, valet services, gratuities, and mileage. If a travel expense form has not been filed within 60 days after incurring an expenditure, the city shall not reimburse such expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 1, § 6), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-20. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  Any witness who shall fail to respond to a subpoena lawfully issued by or for the council, or who shall refuse to testify under oath, shall be guilty of contempt. 
(b)  The subpoenas referenced in subsection (a) of this section shall bear witness in the name of the mayor; shall be issued by the city clerk; and shall be served by the chief of police, any police officer, or by such other person as the mayor may designate. 
(c)  Should any person fail to respond to a subpoena of the council, after having been lawfully served, without good cause, or should the person refuse to testify under oath, then the council shall hold the person in contempt and, in its discretion, punish the person by the imposition of a fine according to the maximum allowed by state law. Each of the failures or refusals, herein described, shall constitute a separate contempt. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 1, § 5), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Inquiries and investigations, § 2.08. 
Secs. 2-21—2-44. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS AND PUBLIC HEARINGS; RULES AND PROCEDURE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-45. - Amendments to the rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order shall be submitted by a councilmember in writing to the city manager three business days before a regular meeting of the city council. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all councilmembers. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the council to be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(9), 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-46. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires a two-thirds vote of the council. Rules governing quorums (section 2-53), voting methods and requirements (section 2-58), the notification to councilmembers of meetings (section 2-48) and rules necessary for compliance with state law or the City Charter may not be suspended; provided, however, that, in the event that a state of emergency is declared by the governor or other authorized state official, the city council may waive time-consuming procedures and formalities imposed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(10), 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-47. - Regular meetings, rescheduling meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the first, second and third Tuesdays of each month. If the regular meeting falls on a federal holiday, the council may reschedule the meeting to the next Tuesday and publish the time change. Any meeting of the council may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. All regular meetings shall be held at city hall in the council meeting room. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(11), 1-24-2006; Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 1, § 1(b), (d)), 12-19-2006) 
State Law reference— Open and public meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-48. - Rescheduled meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled, recessed or moved to a new location within the city site by the mayor for any reason. In addition to the notice required by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to the legal organ of the city, as well as to each member of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(12), 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Calling special meetings, § 2.09(d). 
State Law reference— Operation of government bodies during emergency, O.C.G.A. §§ 38-3-54, 38-3-55. 
Sec. 2-49. - Executive sessions. 
Executive sessions of the council may be held for the purpose of discussing topics exempted from public access requirements by O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). Any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exemptions shall be open to the public. 
(1)  Nonexempt topics. If a councilmember attempts to discuss a nonexempt topic during an executive session, the mayor shall immediately rule that councilmember out of order and such discussion shall cease. If the councilmember persists in discussing the nonexempt topic, the mayor shall adjourn the meeting immediately. 
(2)  Procedure for entering into executive sessions. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session, and the specific reasons for the executive session. All votes taken on items discussed in executive session shall be taken in an open meeting. 
(3)  Executive session minutes. Minutes of executive sessions devoted to any topic other than land acquisition may be maintained by the clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosure of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the city council, may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
a.  Executive sessions discussing real estate acquisition. Minutes of an executive session in which the acquisition of real estate is discussed shall be taken in the same manner as minutes of an open meeting and available for public inspection except that any portion of the minutes identifying the real estate shall be redacted until such time as the action for acquisition of the real estate is taken, or decision is reached that the proposed acquisition is to be terminated or abandoned or until court actions are to be initiated through the use of condemnation proceedings. 
b.  Other executive sessions. Minutes of executive sessions devoted to any topic other than land acquisition may be maintained by the clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosure of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the city council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(4)  Mayor or presiding officer affidavit. The mayor or other presiding officer shall execute an affidavit stating, under oath, that the executive session was devoted to topics exempt from the public access requirements. The affidavit shall include the specific exemption to the open meetings law. The affidavit shall be notarized and filed with the minutes of the open meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(2), 1-24-2006) 
State Law reference— Closed meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4. 
Sec. 2-50. - Mayor; presiding officer. 
The presiding officer of the city council shall be the mayor except as otherwise provided in the Charter. The presiding officer is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the presiding officer shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the city council. The presiding officer shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The mayor may not introduce motions or second motions except that the mayor may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session as authorized by section 2-49. The mayor shall vote only in the case of a tie or in the case where his vote will provide the third affirmative vote required for approval of a matter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(5), 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of mayor, § 3.01; voting by mayor, § 2.10. 
Sec. 2-51. - Mayor pro tempore. 
Following the induction of the mayor and councilmembers, the city council, by a majority vote of the councilmembers, shall elect a councilmember to be mayor pro tempore, who shall serve for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence, except that the mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote as a councilmember and may not exercise the mayor's prerogative to vote in the case of a tie. During the mayor's disability or absence, the mayor pro tempore may veto any action of council. If the mayor pro tempore is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one of the remaining councilmembers, chosen by the members present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the mayor's duties in the same manner as the mayor pro tempore. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, §§ 1(6),(7), 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 2.09(b). 
Sec. 2-52. - Parliamentarian. 
The city attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for city council meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(8), 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-53. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the city council. A quorum is four members of the city council. It is the duty of the mayor or presiding officer to enforce this rule. Any councilmember may raise a point of order directed to the mayor or presiding officer if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a councilmember or councilmembers leave and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting may not continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting may be rescheduled by the mayor or presiding officer with the approval of the councilmembers present. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(4), 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Quorum, § 2.10. 
Sec. 2-54. - Order of business. 
All regular city council meetings shall substantially follow an established order of business. The order shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Roll call. 
(3)  Invocation. 
(4)  Pledge of Allegiance. 
(5)  Approval of meeting agenda. 
(6)  Consent agenda. 
(7)  Reports and presentations. 
(8)  Unfinished business. 
(9)  New business. 
(10)  Public comment. 
(11)  Adjournment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(13), 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-55. - Agenda. 
The city manager shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. Work session topics and council agenda items shall be submitted consistent with the attached process. An agenda approval meeting shall be held by the city manager and the mayor to finalize the agenda. The agenda shall be made available to the city council at least one business day before every city council meeting. 
(1)  Requests for agenda items. Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for a meeting. To be considered, this request shall be submitted in writing to the respective district councilperson. 
(2)  Changing the agenda. The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the city council. A new item, other than a zoning decision, may be added to the agenda by a majority vote of the city council, only if it becomes necessary to address the item during the meeting. An existing item may be removed from the agenda by the majority vote of the city council. 
(3)  Agenda must be made public. The agenda of all matters to come before the city council shall be made available to the public upon request and shall be posted at the meeting site as far in advance as reasonably possible, but not more than two weeks prior to the meeting, not less than 24 hours prior to the start of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(14), 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Duty of mayor regarding agenda, § 3.01(b)(11). 
State Law reference— Agendas, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-56. - Consent agenda. 
A consent agenda may be prepared by the city manager for the city council to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval without debate may be placed on a consent agenda. At the appropriate time of the meeting, the mayor shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a councilmember objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the councilmember shall direct the move of that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the mayor may ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda shall be approved by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(15), 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-57. - Decorum. 
All councilmembers shall conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks shall be directed to the mayor and not to individual councilmembers, staff, or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate and may be ruled out of order. A councilmember may not speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the mayor. All comments made by a councilmember shall address the motion that is being discussed. The mayor shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he may raise a point of order. A second is not required. The mayor may rule on the question or may allow the city council to debate the issue and decide by majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(16), 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-58. - Voting. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of at least three persons voting, and must receive the affirmative vote of a majority of those voting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in the Charter as it pertains to voting by the mayor, a majority shall mean at least one-half of the councilmembers present plus one councilmember, excluding abstentions. When a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the councilmembers present excluding abstentions. In the event of a tie vote, the mayor shall vote to break the tie. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(17), 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Quorum, voting, § 2.10. 
Sec. 2-59. - Abstentions. 
A councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest preventing him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(18), 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Abstentions, § 2.10. 
Sec. 2-60. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the city council shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public wishing to address the city council shall submit their name and the topic of their comments to the city clerk prior to the start of any meeting held by the city council; provided, however, that if the applicants of rezoning actions or individual who wish to oppose a rezoning action has contributed more than $250.00 to the campaign of a councilmember, the individual shall file a campaign disclosure form as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-3 at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the city council. Individuals may be allotted five minutes to make their comments and those comments shall be limited to their chosen topic. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the city council. 
(2)  Agenda items considered by council. By a majority vote, the city council may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the city council. These comments shall be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may speak only once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the city council. Anyone wishing to speak at any city council meeting must be recognized by the mayor before addressing the city council. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a city council meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for councilmembers. Individuals violating any rules of the city council may be ruled out of order by the mayor or on a point of order made by a councilmember. A majority vote of the city council shall rule on the point out of order. An individual violating the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the mayor. 
(4)  Public hearings. The city council may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the city council. Hearings may be held immediately prior to, during or following a meeting of the city council or at such other places and times as the city council may determine. Hearings require at least ten minutes per side. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the city council. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. Hearings on zoning decisions shall be governed in accordance with the zoning policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(19), 1-24-2006) 
State Law reference— Notice and hearing regarding zoning decisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-66-4, 36-66-5. 
Sec. 2-61. - Minutes. 
(a)  More detailed information than required by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 may be included in the minutes at the request of the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall approve the minutes before they may be considered as an official record of the city council. The minutes shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the city council but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the city council. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the city council at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected, if necessary, and approved by the city council at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts regarding the content of the minutes shall be decided by a majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the mayor and attested to by the clerk of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-08, § 1(21), 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Minutes, art. II, § 2.10. 
Sec. 2-62. - Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
The provisions of this division shall serve as the rules and procedures of the city council. In the absence of applicable rules and procedures, which may from time to time be encountered during the public meetings, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall be followed. 
Secs. 2-63—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-81—2-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ETHICS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-02-06, adopted Feb. 17, 2009, amended art. III, div. 2, subdivs. I and II, in their entirety as set out herein. The former art. III, div. 2, subdivs. I and II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, app., §§ 1—25), 10-17-2006. 
Charter reference— Ethics ordinances authorized, § 3.01(b)(9). 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-104. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Associated, when used with reference to a business or an organization, includes any business or organization in which a public servant or a public servant's partner in interest is a director, officer or trustee, or owns or controls, directly or indirectly, and severally or in the aggregate, at least five percent of the outstanding equity, or any business or organization in which a public servant or a partner in interest has a personal interest. 
Benefit means: 
(1)  Anything having a monetary value in excess of $100.00; 
(2)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, perceived or intended by either the one who offers it or the one to whom it is offered to be sufficient in value to influence a public servant in the performance or nonperformance of an official action; or 
(3)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, which, under the circumstances, a reasonably prudent person in the position of the public servant to whom the thing is or may be offered, would recognize as being likely to be intended to influence the public servant in the performance or nonperformance of an official action. 
The term "benefit" includes, but is not limited to, a valuable act, advance, award, contract, compensation, contribution, deposit, emolument, employment, favor, fee, forbearance, fringe benefit, gift, gratuity, honorarium, loan, offer, payment, perquisite, privilege, promise, reward, remuneration, service, subscription, or the promise that any of these things will be conferred in the future. The term "benefit" shall not include food and beverage. 
Board means the board of ethics established by the city to operate under the provisions of this division, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; used generically, the term "board" may mean any voting body: 
(1)  Which is established to participate as a body in some manner in the conduct of the city government, including participation which is merely advisory, whether established by state law, city Charter, ordinance, contract, executive action or any other lawful means; and 
(2)  Any part of which its membership is appointed by the mayor or city council acting on behalf of the city; but the term "board" does not include a board, commission or committee which is the governing body of a separate political subdivision of the state, or whose membership, after appointment, is not subject to any regulation by the city council; nor does it include any city administrative agency, bureau, department, division or office which is administered by individuals rather than by a body. 
Business means an activity, association, commercial entity, corporation, enterprise, firm, franchise, holding company, joint stock company, organization, partnership, receivership, self-employed individual, sole proprietorship, trust or other legal entity established to earn or otherwise obtain money, whether for profit or nonprofit, excluding a municipal corporation or governmental entity. 
Business with which a public servant is associated or associated business means a business in which any of the following applies: 
(1)  The public servant is an owner, partner, director, officer, employee or independent contractor in relation to the business; 
(2)  A public servant's partner in interest is an owner, partner, director or officer; 
(3)  The public servant or a partner in interest is a stockholder of close corporation stock which is worth at least $1,000.00 at fair market value or which represents more than a five percent equity interest; 
(4)  The public servant or a partner in interest is a stockholder of publicly traded stock which is worth at least $5,000.00 at fair market value or which represents more than five percent equity interest, other than publicly traded stock under a trading account if the public servant reports the name and address of the stockholder; or 
(5)  Any business, regardless of ownership or value, by whom or for whose benefit a decision maker is influenced to act in the hope or expectation of obtaining a personal benefit for the public servant or for a partner in interest of the public servant. 
Candidate means an individual who is a candidate for an elective office in the city, as defined in the city Charter, or an applicant for city employment or for an appointive city position. 
Child means a son or daughter, whether or not the son or daughter is the biological offspring of the legal parent or parents and whether or not the son or daughter is financially dependent on the parent or parents. 
Compensation means any benefit conferred upon or received by any person in return for services rendered or to be rendered. 
Complainant means the person who has filed a written complaint, signed and sworn alleging a violation of the ethics ordinance. 
Confidential information means information which has been obtained in the course of holding public office, employment, an independent contract or otherwise acting as a public servant, and which information is not available to members of the public under the Georgia Open Records Act or other law or regulation and which the public servant is not authorized to disclose, including: 
(1)  Any written information that could lawfully be excepted from disclosure pursuant to state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized to do so by state law, or pursuant to some other pertinent law, policy or procedure; 
(2)  Any other information which, if it were written, could be excepted from disclosure under state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized to do so by the state law, or pursuant to some other pertinent law, policy or procedure; and 
(3)  Information which was obtained in the course of or by means of a record or oral report of a lawful executive or closed session, whether or not the disclosure of the information would violate state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized by state law to do so, or unless the public servant disclosing it has been properly authorized to disclose it pursuant to an applicable law, policy or procedure; however, when such information is also available through channels which are open to the public, this provision does not prohibit public servants from disclosing the availability of those channels. 
Conflict of interest means not only a personal interest, as defined in this division, but also a professional or nonpecuniary interest, such as arises when the city attorney is precluded from representing one public servant because of the city attorney's preexisting attorney-client relationship with another public servant. 
Decision maker means any public servant or group of public servants empowered to act in a discretionary manner on behalf of the city in any capacity whatsoever, including the making of recommendations. To the extent this division is applicable to them, any volunteer or independent contractor who is empowered to exercise any discretionary power which could influence a public servant in the performance or nonperformance of an official action. In this division, the term "decision maker" is used to represent any and every public servant who could take any discretionary action regarding a matter in which a public servant or a partner in interest has or may have a conflict of interest, or as a result of which a public servant might receive a personal benefit. 
Decision making means the exercise of any discretionary public power in any capacity whatsoever, including the making of recommendations, by any public servant whose action pertains to a matter in which a public servant or a public servant's partner in interest has or may have a conflict of interest, or as a result of which a public servant might receive a personal benefit. 
Disclose means, unless the context of this division indicates otherwise, to provide the city clerk with written notice of a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest, and any other pertinent information, including the nature and extent of the public servant's conflict of interest, the decision maker who may act on the matter, and the name and address of any person alleged to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest. Unless this division or a law which supersedes it requires or permits another procedure, information shall be deemed disclosed if any public servant within a reasonable time before any official action is to be taken by the decision maker provides the city clerk with written notice disclosing the conflict or potential conflict. For purposes of this provision, the phrase "within a reasonable time" means within adequate time to allow the city clerk, acting within the city's normal schedule and procedures for transmitting written documents, to forward the disclosure to the decision maker before whom the matter is pending or may be brought, and within adequate time to allow the decision maker to review the disclosure before taking any official action. 
Employee means a person, other than an elected public officer, employed and paid a salary to work for the city, whether under civil service or not, whether full time, part-time, or on a contract basis, and including those officially selected but not yet serving. 
Expenditure means a payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or gift of money or anything of value. 
Gift means any benefit or thing or act of monetary value which is conveyed to or performed for the benefit of a public servant or a partner in interest, including any advance, award, contract, contribution, deposit, employment, favor, forbearance, gift, gratuity, honorarium, loan, payment, service, subscription, or the promise that any of these things or acts of value will be conferred in the future, if such thing or act of value is conferred or performed without the lawful exchange of consideration which is at least equal in value to the thing or act conferred or performed. 
Immediate family means: 
(1)  A public servant's spouse, children, grandchildren, parents, parents-in-law, grandparents, grandparents-in-law, sisters, sisters-in-law, brothers, brothers-in-law, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, nieces, nephews, aunts, or uncles (whether by marriage, lineal descent or adoption); 
(2)  A public servant's relative by marriage, lineal descent or adoption who receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his or her support from the public servant or from whom the public servant receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half of his or her support; and 
(3)  An individual claimed by the public servant or the public servant's spouse as a dependent under the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
Interest means any personal benefit accruing to a public servant or the public servant's partner in interest, whether in the public servant's own name or the name of any person or business from which the public servant is entitled to receive any personal benefit, as a result of a matter which is or which is expected to become the subject of an official action by or with the city. 
Loan means a transfer of money, property or anything else of ascertainable monetary value in exchange for an obligation, conditional or not, to repay in whole or in part. 
Matter means, unless the context of this division indicates otherwise, any act, action, agenda item, allegation, application, amendment, auction, bill, business, case, charge, claim, consideration, contract, controversy, decree, deed, deliberation, discussion, hearing, issue, lease, license, measure, offer, order, ordinance, permit, personnel action, petition, policy, presentation, procedure, privilege, proceeding, project, proposal, proposition, purchase, recommendation, regulation, rental, request, resolution, sale, subject, transaction, use, variance or other discretionary choice pending before a city decision maker when a public servant or a partner in interest has a personal interest in the outcome of the decision, or the decision may result in a personal benefit to a public servant or a partner in interest. 
Ministerial action means a simple and definite action or function imposed by law where no exercise of discretion or judgment is required. 
Negotiating concerning prospective employment means one or more discussions between a public servant and a potential employer other than the city concerning the possibility of the public servant or a partner in interest considering or accepting employment with the employer, in which discussion the public servant responds in a positive way. 
Office means any of the following: 
(1)  An elective position within the government of the city; or 
(2)  An appointive city position that does not serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
Officer means any person elected or appointed to hold an office, as defined in the Charter of the city. 
Official action means any act, action, approval, decision, denial, directive, disapproval, inaction, order, performance, nonperformance, recommendation, vote, or other direct result of a public servant's exercise of discretionary authority in connection with the public servant's public position. 
Official duty means any official action or ministerial action which a public servant is obligated or authorized to perform by virtue of being a public servant. 
Organization means, unless the context indicates otherwise, any nonprofit business other than an individual or governmental agency. 
Partner in interest means, when used in this division in connection with a public servant, as in the phrase "a public servant or a partner in interest," any and all of the following: 
(1)  A member of the public servant's immediate family; 
(2)  A business with which the public servant or a member of the public servant's immediate family is associated; 
(3)  Any other person with whom the public servant or a member of his or her immediate family is in business, or is negotiating or has an agreement concerning future employment or the future conferring of any personal benefit, whether in the public servant's own name or the name of any business or person from whom the public servant is entitled, or expects to become entitled, to receive any personal benefit, as a result of a contract or transaction which is, or which is expected to become, the subject of an official action by or with the city. The term partner in interest does not imply or require any form of legal partnership or formal agreement; or 
(4)  When used in the phrase "a public servant or a partner in interest," the term "partner in interest" refers only to a partner in interest of the public servant to whom reference is being made, and not to any other person's partner in interest. 
Personal benefit means any benefit which is offered or received, or perceived to be offered or received, primarily for the purpose of influencing the manner in which a public servant performs or refrains from performing an official action, so that an attempt is made to induce the public servant, or the public servant is induced to act in favor of some interest other than the public interest on the basis of an expectation or hope that the public servant or a partner in interest of the public servant will obtain some private gain by acting against the public interest; provided, however, that the term "personal benefit" within the meaning of this division does not include any of the following, which, although they may benefit individual public servants, are deemed to be primarily public benefits rather than personal benefits: 
(1)  Payment by the city of salaries, compensation or employee benefits; or payment by an employer or business other than the city of salaries, compensation, employee benefits or pursuant to a contract, when the payment is unrelated to a public servant's status as a public servant and is not made for the purpose of influencing, directly or indirectly, the vote, official action or decision of a public servant; 
(2)  Fees, expenses, or income, including those resulting from outside employment, which are permitted and reported in accordance with the policies of the city; 
(3)  Authorized reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses; 
(4)  Admission, regardless of value, to events to which public servants are invited in their official, representative capacity as public servants; 
(5)  Campaign or political contributions which are made and reported in accordance with state law; 
(6)  Reasonable hosting, including travel and expenses, entertainment, meals or refreshments furnished in connection with public events, appearances or ceremonies related to official city business, if furnished by the sponsor of such public event; or in connection with speaking engagements, teaching or rendering other public assistance to an organization or another governmental entity; this provision applies only if the city does not also pay the person for the same activity; 
(7)  Awards publicly presented in recognition of public service, acts of heroism or for solving crimes; 
(8)  Anything of value, regardless of the value, when the thing of value is offered to the city, is accepted on behalf of the city, and is to remain the property of the city; 
(9)  Commercially reasonable loans made in the ordinary course of the lender's business in accordance with prevailing rates and terms, and which do not discriminate against or in favor of an individual who is a public servant because of such individual's status as a public servant; 
(10)  Complimentary copies of trade publications; 
(11)  Any unsolicited benefit conferred by any one person or business if the economic value totals less than $250.00 per calendar year, and if there is no express or implied understanding or agreement that a vote, official action or decision of a public servant will be influenced; 
(12)  Reasonable compensation for a published work which did not involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources, if the payment is arranged or paid by the publisher of the work; 
(13)  Reasonable compensation for a published work which did involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources, if the payment of the compensation to the public servant is lawfully authorized by a representative of the city who is empowered to authorize such compensation; 
(14)  Anything of value, if the payment, gift, or other transfer of value is unrelated to and does not arise from the recipient's holding or having held a public position, and if the activity or occasion for which it is given does not involve the use of the city's time, equipment, facilities, supplies, staff or other resources which is not available to the general public; 
(15)  Anything of value received as a devise, bequest or inheritance; 
(16)  A gift received from a relative within the third degree of consanguinity, under the civil law computation method, to the public servant, or the spouse of such a relative; or 
(17)  A gift received from a spouse of a public servant, or a spouse's relative within the third degree of consanguinity to the spouse, under the civil law computation method. 
Personal interest means a direct or indirect interest having value peculiar to a particular individual or group, whether the value is pecuniary or nonpecuniary, which value may accrue to such individual or group or result in such individual or group deriving or potentially deriving a personal benefit as a result of the approval or denial of any ordinance, resolution, order or other official action, or the performance or nonperformance thereof, by a public servant, and which interest is not shared by the general public. 
Public servant means the mayor, members of the city council, and municipal court judges. The term "public servant" includes all individuals appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Reasonable means fair, proper, equitable and just under the circumstances. 
Records means any minutes, papers, documents, completed forms, or other records maintained by a public agent for the purpose of fulfilling the disclosure requirements of this division. 
Relative means a person who is related to an official or employee (whether by marriage, lineal descent or adoption) as spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, grandparent, grandchild, parents-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-law. 
Respondent means the person against whom a complaint has been made alleging a violation of the ethics ordinance. 
Volunteer means an individual who is permitted by the city, or by a person authorized to act on behalf of the city, to assist public servants in performing any kind of official duty or action without any expectation of receiving compensation. 
Voting body means the city council and any other city authority, board, commission, committee, council or group, regardless of whether its function is legislative, administrative, quasi-administrative or quasi-judicial or any combination thereof, which must act as a body on the basis of a vote of some or all of its members. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, app.), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. - 2-105. Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The city government is a representative democracy. Those who are elected, appointed, hired, volunteer or campaign to serve the public as representatives accept a public trust, which they share with those whom they elect, appoint, hire or otherwise enlist to help them serve the public. Public trust requires that acts which are contrary to the public interest be defined and prohibited; that there be an orderly procedure for raising and addressing ethical questions; that ethical behavior be encouraged and suitably rewarded; and that unethical behavior be discouraged and suitably disciplined through a process which is fundamentally fair. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of each public servant to act in a manner which contributes to cultivating public trust in the integrity of government and avoiding even lawful activity when the appearance of impropriety would lessen the public's confidence. 
(c)  In adopting this division, the city recognizes that: 
(1)  Public servants are also members of society and, therefore, share the same general personal and economic interests in the decisions and policies of government as all members of the community. 
(2)  Public servants retain their rights to publicly express their views on matters of general public interest, and to express their opinions on the effect of public actions on their personal or economic interests or rights. 
(3)  It is sound public policy for standards of ethical conduct for public servants to distinguish between those minor and inconsequential conflicts that are unavoidable in a free society, and those conflicts which are personal, material and avoidable. 
(4)  Public servants are entitled to engage in employment, professional or business activities, other than official duties, in order to support themselves and their families and to maintain a continuity of professional or business activity, and are entitled to maintain investments. 
(d)  This division provides the minimum standards below which a public servant's conduct cannot fall without the risk of penalty. The principal policy which forms the foundation of this section is to encourage internal commitment by establishing and maintaining a work environment which supports integrity with pride and enthusiasm. A work environment which supports integrity includes public servants who: 
(1)  Recognize with gratitude that the primary reason they hold a public position is to serve the public; 
(2)  Are motivated and committed to pursue ethical ideals which always exceed minimum standards and often achieve the highest standards; 
(3)  Encourage ethical practices which protect, advance and promote the public interest; 
(4)  Recognize that the most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act ethically themselves, and to consistently react appropriately with respect to the ethical decisions of others; 
(5)  When they observe serious unethical practices, promptly disclose them to appropriate authorities, and encourage others to do the same; 
(6)  Ensure that those for whom they are responsible are aware of minimum standards of ethics below which their conduct cannot fall without the risk of disciplinary consequences; and 
(7)  When circumstances warrant, appropriately discipline those who are proven to have engaged in unethical behavior. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 1), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-106. - Purposes of division. 
This section, including the definitions set forth in section 2-104, is adopted to: 
(1)  Identify the minimum standards of ethical conduct which public servants must meet; 
(2)  Adequately educate public servants in the principles of ethics; 
(3)  Encourage public servants to pursue the highest ethical ideals which they can achieve; 
(4)  Provide a process by which public servants may identify and resolve ethical issues; 
(5)  Provide a process to ensure the prompt disclosure by public servants of serious unethical practices, and encourage others to do the same; 
(6)  Provide a fair and impartial process by which alleged violations of this division may be heard; 
(7)  Provide for a just and reasonable balance among the rights of all individuals who are directly affected by the operation of this division; and 
(8)  Establish penalties, as appropriate, for public servants who violate the public trust. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 2), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-107. - Applicability of division. 
This division applies to all public servants, as the term is defined in this division. It shall not apply to a municipal judge when the judge is acting in a judicial capacity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 4), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-108. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This division does not prevent any public servant from accepting other employment or following any pursuit which in no way interferes with the full and faithful discharge of his or her public duties, provided that the public servant complies with all applicable city requirements, including any requirements imposed by this division. 
(b)  No public servant shall be deemed to have a conflict of interest by virtue of carrying out any contract pursuant to which the public servant directly or indirectly received income or benefits in the form of compensation for the performance of official duties. 
(c)  A former public servant is not prohibited from entering into a contract to represent the city in any matter. 
(d)  No public servant shall be deemed to have a conflict of interest by virtue of sharing, directly or indirectly, in the benefit of a lawful city action when the benefit to the public servant is substantially the same as the benefit to the public at large or to a segment of the public to whom the benefit is provided in a nondiscriminatory manner. 
(e)  This division does not prohibit any public servant from taking any action to approve the lawful payment of salaries, employee benefits, reimbursements of actual and necessary expenses, or other lawful payments which are authorized in accordance with city policies. 
(f)  This division does not prohibit a public servant from taking any official action properly within the scope of his or her duties with respect to any proposal to enact or modify law or public policy. 
(g)  This division does not prohibit an elected official or other public servant from raising campaign contributions in any manner which is otherwise permitted by law. 
(h)  This division does not prohibit communication between an individual or organization and a candidate regarding the candidate's views, record or plans for future action regarding an issue or measure in an attempt to determine a candidate's viewpoints or how the candidate plans to act in the future, if such communication results in an endorsement of the candidate, a decision not to endorse the candidate, or a contribution or expenditure required to be recorded or reported under a state statute. 
(i)  Actions which might otherwise be alleged to constitute a conflict of interest shall be deemed to comply with this division and not to be a conflict of interest if: 
(1)  Before acting, the public servant requested and received a written opinion from the city attorney or a formal ethics opinion or a confidential advisory opinion from the board in accordance with the procedures established in this division; 
(2)  The material facts, as stated in the request for an opinion, are true and complete; and 
(3)  The actions taken were consistent with the opinion. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 3), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-109. - Penalties. 
Any violations of this division shall be punishable to the maximum extent permitted by law. Any disciplinary action shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of this division, as well as any other laws, policies and procedures applicable to the position of the offender and the gravity of the offense. The board is permitted to take any action which it is otherwise lawfully permitted to take, including, but not limited to, any one or combination of the following which the board deems appropriate under the circumstances: 
(1)  Letter of notification. The board may issue a letter of notification when it finds that a violation of this division was clearly unintentional or inadvertent. The letter may advise the respondent of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations. 
(2)  Letter of admonition. The board may issue a letter of admonition when it finds that the violation of this division was minor and/or may have been unintentional or inadvertent. 
(3)  Letter of reprimand. The board may issue a letter of reprimand when it finds that the respondent has intentionally or knowingly violated this division. 
(4)  Recommendations to city council. When the board finds that the respondent has intentionally or knowingly violated this division, the board may make a recommendation to the mayor and city council, including, but not limited to, a recommendation for suspension, forfeiture of office or removal from office, and/or banning or temporarily suspending the respondent's (or respondent's associated businesses' or organizations') right to solicit, bid on or obtain a contract with or from the city, as allowed by applicable law. 
(5)  Referral to ethics training. Upon finding of violation of this division, the board may require that the respondent undergo ethics training in addition to or in lieu of any other penalties imposed upon the respondent. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 23), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-110. - Penalties cumulative. 
The penalties prescribed in this division shall be cumulative and not exclusive of each other or of any other penalties which may be imposed pursuant to any other laws or policies. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 24), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-111. - Liberal construction of division. 
The provisions of this division are to be construed liberally, to the end that the public interest be fully protected, and shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws and applicable provisions of this City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 25), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-112. - Duties of public servant. 
(a)  No public servant or former public servant shall divulge any confidential information to any person who is not authorized to have it nor divulge to any unauthorized person confidential information acquired in the course of holding his or her position in advance of the time prescribed by the city council, administrators, or other applicable law for its release to the public. 
(b)  All public servants shall respond fully and truthfully to any inquiries by the city attorney or the board in connection with the investigation of an alleged or potential violation of this division. All public servants shall cooperate fully in any investigation by the city attorney or the board, and shall locate, compile and produce for them such information as they may request, unless the information requested is exempt from disclosure under this division or other applicable law. 
(c)  Except as set forth below in subsection (d), within a reasonable period of time, all public servants must report a violation of this division of which they have knowledge to the city clerk or the mayor, who shall forward such report to the board. 
(d)  Public servants are not, however, required to report a violation that has already been reported. 
(e)  In addition to being a violation of other laws, it is also a violation of this division for any public servant to: 
(1)  Be convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Be found liable of violating any federal, state or city law prohibiting discrimination or sexual harassment; 
(3)  Be found liable of violating any federal, state or city laws prohibiting retaliation against public servants who assert a lawful claim of any nature or otherwise engage in lawfully protected activity; or 
(4)  Be found liable of violating any state laws governing lobbying activities or regulating political activity. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-113. - Conflict of interests and personal benefits prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted under applicable federal, state and city laws and policies, including the city's procurement policies, no public servant shall have a personal interest in any official action. 
(b)  No public servant shall accept or receive, directly or indirectly, from any person, including one whose identity is unknown to the public servant, any personal benefit under circumstances in which it can reasonably be inferred that the benefit is intended to influence the public servant or as a reward for any official action of the public servant. 
(c)  No person, including any vendor, contractor, business, or board of the city, shall offer or give any personal benefit to any public servant or any partner-in-interest of the public servant. 
(d)  No public servant or partner in interest of that public servant shall solicit from any person, directly or indirectly, any personal benefit, regardless of value, or the promise of receiving a personal benefit in the future, for the public servant. 
(e)  No current or former public servant shall intentionally use or disclose information gained in the course of, or by reason of, his or her official position or activities in any way that could result in the receipt of any personal benefit for the public servant, for a partner in interest of that public servant, or for any other person. This provision shall not: 
(1)  Prohibit the disclosure of public information; 
(2)  Prohibit the disclosure of information the public servant has been authorized to disclose; 
(3)  Prohibit the disclosure of any such information to incumbent public servants to whom the information may be pertinent; 
(4)  Prevent the disclosure of violations of this division or other illegal acts to the proper authorities; or 
(5)  Prohibit the disclosure of any such information the disclosure of which is required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 6), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-114. - Duty to leave meeting. 
(a)  To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after any public servant or a partner in interest is determined to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, and once all questions relating to the conflict of interest have been answered to the satisfaction of the decision maker, the public servant shall immediately leave the meeting room, except that if the matter is being considered at a public meeting, the public servant may remain in the area of the room occupied by the general public. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall require members of voting bodies to leave their seats while action is taken regarding any item contained on a consent agenda on which there is no deliberation, the public servant's conflict has been disclosed, and the public servant abstains from voting on the item. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 7), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-115. - Public contracts. 
(a)  The city is prohibited from entering into any contract with a business in which a public servant or a public servant's partner in interest has a controlling interest involving services or property of a value in excess of $2,500.00. 
(b)  Any public servant who has or may have a personal interest in any contract shall disclose such interest prior to the first of any of the following events: 
(1)  The solicitation of a contract; 
(2)  The bidding of a contract; 
(3)  The negotiation of a contract; or 
(4)  The approval of a contract by the city council. 
(c)  Any contract entered into in violation of this section may be voided by the city in an action commenced within three years of the date on which the board, or the department or officer acting for the city in regard to the allocation of funds from which such payment is derived, knew or should have known that a violation of this section occurred. This section does not affect the application of any state statute. 
(d)  Mandatory provision in volunteer agreements. Volunteers share in receiving the public's trust and in the responsibility to contribute to creating and maintaining an ethical work environment. Volunteers serve without the expectation of receiving any compensation from the city, and it is improper for any volunteer to seek any compensation. Volunteers, unless expressly authorized by a public servant empowered to grant such authorization, are prohibited from acting as volunteers in any matter in which they have a conflict of interest or a potential or alleged conflict of interest; or in any matter in which they hope to receive any personal benefit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 8), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-116. - Disclosure of conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest. 
(a)  A member of the city council who has or may have a conflict of interest in a matter which requires an official action by any decision maker shall, before the matter is decided, disclose the conflict of interest or the potential or alleged conflict of interest. If the member of the city council believes that no conflict of interest exists, or that despite any alleged or potential special interest, such city councilmember is nevertheless able to vote and otherwise participate fairly, objectively and in a manner consistent with the public interest, then the member shall so state in the written disclosure. 
(b)  If any member of the board has or may have a conflict of interest in any matter before the board, such member shall not appear before the board, discuss, debate, deliberate about, act upon, vote upon or otherwise participate in or influence the decision-making process pertaining to the matter in which the member has a conflict of interest. 
(c)  Any public servant who has or may have a conflict of interest shall disclose it. After receiving a disclosure, the city clerk shall: 
(1)  Maintain a record of such disclosure; and 
(2)  Promptly forward copies of the disclosure to any person named in the disclosure, the board and the city attorney. 
(d)  Any public servant who believes that any other public servant has a conflict of interest in any agenda item before a governmental body shall disclose such interest to the city clerk, and the city clerk shall forward copies of such disclosure to the person alleged to have a conflict of interest, the board and the city attorney. 
(e)  A public servant, in addition to disqualifying himself from participation in any decision regarding the pecuniary or employment interest of a partner in interest, shall make known the existence of the relationship and the interest by filing with the city clerk a written disclosure of the relationship and the nature and extent of the conflict of interest involved. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 9), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-117. - Unauthorized outside employment. 
(a)  Purpose of policy. The purpose of the policy governing unauthorized outside employment is to prevent conflicts of interest and conflicts of loyalty; to prevent abuses regarding dual compensation, payment for work not done, or unlawful gifts of public funds; and to prevent excessive loss of efficiency in the performance of public service. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. A public servant shall not accept any employment, nor enter into any contract, nor perform any service for compensation that results in a financial conflict of interest or a conflict of loyalties which would affect the performance of the public servant's official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 10), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-118. - Prohibited conduct, and other abuses or misuses of position. 
(a)  Public servants of the city shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law, and shall avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Prohibited conduct of each such public servant shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Granting or making available to any person any special consideration, treatment, advantage, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large; 
(2)  Requesting, using or permitting the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor, or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of oneself or any other person, except as otherwise allowed by law; 
(3)  Participating in the deliberation of or voting on any matter involving personal financial or personal interest; 
(4)  Engaging in private employment with, or rendering services for, any private person who has business transactions with the city, unless the public servant has made full public disclosure of such employment; 
(5)  Accepting any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan, or promise, that would not be offered or given to the public servant if the individual were not a public servant; 
(6)  Disclosing any confidential information concerning any public servant, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city, without prior formal authorization of the city council; 
(7)  Using or permitting the use of confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of the public servant or any other person; 
(8)  Ordering any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure; 
(9)  Use his or her superior position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the public servant's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods and services for personal, business, or political purposes; or 
d.  Work for him or her personally without offering just compensation. 
(10)  A public servant shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(b)  No public servant shall hold any other office, elected or appointed, in any other governmental entity, when the duties of such office are incompatible with the proper discharge of the public servant's duties with the city. For purposes of this division, the holding of any office, elective or appointive, with any other governmental entity by any member of the city council or of a board is hereby prohibited in any one of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where one office is subordinate to the other; 
(2)  Where one office carries the power of removal of the other; or 
(3)  Where the occupancy of both offices is prohibited by the City Charter or other law. 
(c)  No public servant shall falsely represent his or her personal opinion to be the official position of the city, and no public servant shall falsely represent his or her personal opinion to be the official position of any board. This subsection shall not apply to statements of elected officials made in the course of fulfilling the responsibilities of their offices or in running for election to office. 
(d)  All public servants have a fiduciary duty to use city fiscal and human resources in a manner which advances the public interest, and to refrain from using city resources for their personal benefit; therefore, public servants are prohibited from using city resources in any manner which violates any applicable law or policy, and are expressly prohibited from using any city resource to obtain any personal benefit. 
(e)  No public servant shall use his or her official authority or position to influence or interfere with or affect the results of any election, nor to solicit or receive contributions from city employees in connection with any city election. 
(f)  No public servant shall suppress any public document, record, report or any other public information available to the general public because it might tend to unfavorably affect their private financial, personal, or political interest. 
(g)  When a public servant, in the course of carrying out his or her duties, has been offered or is discussing future employment with a business that is presently dealing with the city concerning matters within the public servant's current official duties, that person shall disclose such possible future employment to the city clerk. The city clerk shall disclose such possible future employment to the city council. 
(h)  No member of the city council having a personal interest in a matter shall represent himself or any other person before the city council in connection with that matter, nor in connection with any matter in which a partner in interest has a personal interest, except in cases where a legal right to self-representation exists. 
(i)  No member of a board having a conflict of interest shall represent himself or any other person before that board in connection with that matter, nor in connection with any matter in which a member of his or her immediate family or a business with which he or she, or a member of his or her immediate family, is associated has a prohibited interest, except in cases where a legal right to self-representation exists. 
(j)  No member of a board who is prohibited by this provision from representing himself before that board shall represent himself in the appeal of any decision of that board to any decision maker. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 11), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Secs. 2-119—2-149. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Board of Ethics 

Sec. 2-150. - Creation; membership; terms; compensation. 
(a)  Created; membership. There is created a board of ethics consisting of five members and two alternates. Each board member and alternate shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a board member or alternate. 
(b)  Member restrictions. Members of the board and alternates shall not be elected officials, persons appointed to elective office, full time appointed officials (whether exempt or nonexempt), or city employees, and shall hold no elected public office nor any other city office or employment. 
(c)  Appointment. Members of the board and alternates shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the board shall be made by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(d)  Chairperson. The board shall elect one of its members to serve as chairperson of the board and one of its members to serve as vice-chairperson of the board. Alternates may not hold any office on the board. 
(e)  Term of office. Members of the board and alternates shall serve staggered terms of no more than three years. A board member shall hold office until that member's successor is appointed. 
(f)  Limit of terms. No board member may serve more than two consecutive terms as a board member. No alternate may serve more than two consecutive terms as an alternate. 
(g)  Deliberations, actions open to public. The board's deliberations and actions upon requests shall be open to the public. 
(h)  Compensation. Members of the board are volunteers and shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(i)  Staff support. The city council shall provide such staff support for the board as the city council determines to be necessary for the board to fulfill its duties and responsibilities. The city attorney is designated to be the legal advisor for the board, except that the city attorney is not authorized to represent the board in any legal action if doing so would create a conflict which would prevent the city attorney from also representing the mayor, the city manager, or city council. The city clerk shall serve as recording secretary to the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 12), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-151. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The board shall, in addition to its other duties: 
(1)  Develop and adopt written procedural rules, which rules shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and city council, and filed with the city clerk; 
(2)  Be authorized to administer oaths; 
(3)  Conduct hearings as needed to hear and decide specific cases in which a violation of this ordinance is alleged, whether such cases arise from a complaint or are brought on the board's own motion; 
(4)  No later than December 1 of each year, submit an annual report to the mayor and city council concerning its action, if any, in the preceding year, which shall contain a summary of its decisions and opinions; the board shall make any alterations in the summaries necessary to prevent disclosure of any confidential information pertaining to any individual or organization; 
(5)  Establish a process for evaluating all significant aspects of the administration and implementation of this division; 
(6)  Prescribe and make available necessary forms for use under this ordinance; 
(7)  When necessary, request assistance from the city attorney in compelling the production of documents and witnesses to assist in any investigation; and 
(8)  When necessary, retain outside legal counsel and other experts as needed after solicitation of recommendations from the city attorney (unless the need to retain outside counsel is caused by a conflict involving the city attorney's office), and upon approval by the city council of a contract for services approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(b)  The board may: 
(1)  Conduct meetings and hearings as the board determines necessary or appropriate: 
a.  To ascertain public opinions and to gather information from the general public, public servants, or others regarding any aspect of the city's ethics policies or practices; and 
b.  For any other purpose for which the board is authorized to conduct hearings. 
(2)  Respond, as it deems appropriate, to requests for confidential advisory opinions; the board may decline to render an opinion in response to any request for an advisory opinion; 
(3)  Render and publish written formal opinions on any matter within the scope of the board's authority; the board may initiate opinions on its own motion or upon request; 
(4)  At the request of a person, the city attorney may render an informal opinion with respect to the prospective conduct of such person. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit a request for an informal opinion by any public servant from the city attorney regarding a potential conflict of interest. If the city attorney elects to render an informal opinion, the city attorney shall, within a reasonable time, submit a written summary of the opinion to the board for the board's information; if the city attorney declines to render an informal opinion, nothing shall preclude the person requesting the opinion from requesting the board for an opinion; 
(5)  Prepare and publish special reports, technical studies, and recommendations to further the purposes of this division; and 
(6)  Make recommendations to the mayor and city council of legislative or administrative actions regarding the city's policies and practices which the board believes could enhance the ethical environment in which public servants work. 
(c)  The duties and limitations of an alternate are as follows: 
(1)  An alternate shall receive notice of and agenda for all meetings and hearings of the board; 
(2)  An alternate may be appointed by the chairperson of the board to serve on any committees of the board; 
(3)  An alternate may participate in discussions at all meetings and hearings of the board; 
(4)  An alternate may not vote at any board meeting or hearing, except as authorized in (c)(5) of this section; and 
(5)  In the absence of a board member at a board meeting or hearing, the chairperson (or vice-chairperson in the chairperson's absence) may appoint an alternate to take the place of the absent board member at said board meeting or hearing, and said appointed alternate shall have all rights, duties, and responsibilities attendant to board members, including without limitation, the right to motion the board for action and the right to vote on any item before the board. The alternate's service as a board member shall terminate at the close of the board meeting or hearing at which the alternate was appointed to serve. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 13), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-152. - Custodian of records. 
The city clerk shall serve as legal custodian of the board's records, and accept, file, maintain and administer, in accordance with all applicable laws, any information related to the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 14), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-153. - Requests for actions. 
(a)  Any person may file a request for board action with the city clerk, either personally or on behalf of an organization or governmental body, and may request of the board an ethics opinion, whether a formal opinion or a confidential advisory opinion, regarding the propriety of any matter or matters to which the person is or may become a party; and any decision maker, with the consent of a prospective appointee, may request of the board an ethics opinion regarding the propriety of any matter to which the public servant, prospective public servant or former public servant is or may become a party. 
(b)  Any request for board action shall be in writing, and shall be signed by the person making the request. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 15), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-154. - Limitations of power. 
The board does not have the authority to reverse or otherwise modify a prior action of a public servant of the city. If the board finds a prior action of a public servant to have been ethically improper, the board may advise the appropriate party or parties that the action should be reconsidered. Upon such advice by the board, the action may be reconsidered by the appropriate person or public body. If the board determines an existing city contract to be ethically improper, after such determination and advice from the board, the city may void or seek termination of the contract if legally permissible. The board may refer a matter to the city attorney for review and consideration for appropriate action. Upon completion of review and consideration, the city attorney's office shall report its findings to the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 16), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-155. - Procedures for hearing complaints. 
(a)  Any person may file a complaint with the city clerk where the person believes that a public servant may have violated this division. 
(b)  A complaint shall be made in writing on a form that is created and prescribed by the board of ethics, shall be signed and sworn to by the complainant in the presence of a notary public, shall specify the provision(s) of this article alleged to have been violated and the facts alleged to constitute the violation, and shall identify all persons with knowledge of the facts alleged to constitute the violation, and shall attach all documentation or other evidence supporting the alleged violation. 
(c)  Upon receipt of such a complaint, but in any event not later than five working days after receipt, the city clerk shall acknowledge receipt to the complainant, and forward the complaint simultaneously to the board, the respondent, and the city attorney. 
(d)  The city attorney shall provide the board with a preliminary written analysis of the complaint no later than 30 calendar days from the date the complaint is filed with the city clerk. 
(e)  During any investigation and during any hearing which is conducted to determine whether a violation of this division has occurred: 
(1)  The respondent may be represented by legal counsel, licensed in the State of Georgia of his or her own choosing; and 
(2)  The respondent or his or her counsel, if any, shall have an opportunity to: 
a.  Challenge the sufficiency of any complaint which has been filed against him or her; 
b.  Examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the board in connection with the matter heard; 
c.  Bring witnesses and/or request witnesses to be subpoenaed by the board; 
d.  Establish all pertinent facts and circumstances; 
e.  Question or refute testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses; and 
f.  Exercise, to the extent the board, in its discretion, determines to be just and reasonable, any pretrial discovery procedure usually available in civil actions. 
(f)  The following principles shall apply regarding evidence in connection with hearings conducted by the board: 
(1)  The board shall not be bound to adhere to statutory rules of evidence, but shall be fundamentally fair and reasonable in its administration of evidence. 
(2)  All evidence including certified copies of records which the board considers shall be fully offered and made a part of the record in the proceedings. 
(3)  The respondent shall be afforded adequate opportunity to rebut or offer countervailing evidence. 
(4)  The board shall inform the respondent or his or her counsel of exculpatory evidence in its possession. 
(5)  The standard of evidence sufficient to prove a violation in hearings conducted under this article shall be by a preponderance of the evidence admitted at the hearing. 
(g)  The board, in addition to its other duties and powers, may: 
(1)  Appoint a hearing officer in the place of the chairperson to conduct hearings under this article; 
(2)  With the approval of the city council, retain outside legal counsel and other experts as needed with respect to hearings in accordance with its policies. The selection of outside counsel or other experts and any contract for such persons shall be made after solicitation of recommendations from the city attorney and upon approval by the city council of a contract for services approved as to form by the city attorney; 
(3)  Order testimony to be taken by deposition before any individual who is designated by the board and, in such instances, to compel testimony and the production of evidence to the extent it is otherwise lawfully authorized to do so; 
(4)  Require any person to submit in writing such reports and answers to questions relevant to the proceedings as the board may prescribe, such submission to be made within such period and under oath or otherwise as the board may determine; and 
(5)  Request and obtain copies of state income tax returns and access to other appropriate information as permitted under state law regarding all persons who are the subject of such investigation. 
(h)  The respondent shall have 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of the complaint from the city clerk to submit a written response prior to the board deciding whether to hold a hearing. 
(i)  Any person whose name is mentioned or who is otherwise identified and who, in the opinion of the board, may be adversely affected thereby may, upon request of the person or a representative of the person, or upon the request of any member of the board, appear at the hearing to testify on his own behalf or have a representative appear to so testify, and the board may permit any other person to appear and to testify at a hearing. 
(j)  Upon request of the respondent, on its own motion, or upon request of the city attorney, the board shall be authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of necessary witnesses. 
(k)  Within 30 calendar days following receipt of the city attorney's analysis, the board shall review and consider the complaint and the city attorney's analysis, and, if a hearing is to be held, shall set a date certain for the hearing to take place within 60 calendar days of said review by the board, unless the respondent petitions for and the board consents to a later date. 
(l)  As soon as practicable after giving due consideration to a complaint, or, if a hearing was held, after the hearing, the board shall take any action or combination of actions which it deems appropriate and which it is lawfully empowered to take, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Dismiss the complaint based on any of the following grounds; 
a.  The complaint is deemed frivolous, or was filed with knowledge of its falsity or with reckless disregard for its truth or falsity; 
b.  The complaint does not allege facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this division; 
c.  The board has no jurisdiction over the matter; 
d.  The complainant fails to cooperate in the board's review and consideration of the complaint; 
e.  The complaint, on its face, does not demonstrate that a violation of this division has occurred; 
f.  The board exercises its discretion to forego hearing an alleged violation of the ethics ordinance upon a determination that the respondent is already subject to appropriate proceedings that will adequately address the alleged violation; or 
g.  The complaint is defective in a manner which results in the board being unable to make any sound determination. 
(2)  Determine that the complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this division and that the board will conduct a hearing, in which case the board shall promptly send written notice of such determination to the respondent and complainant; or 
(3)  Determine that further information is required to determine whether the complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this division; and 
a.  Conduct its own investigation of any alleged violation; 
b.  Request the city attorney to investigate the complaint and report all findings back to the board; 
c.  Schedule the complaint for further review and consideration at a future time certain, in which case the board shall promptly send written notice of such determination to the respondent and to the complainant; 
d.  Refer the complaint for criminal investigation or prosecution; or 
e.  Refer the complaint, along with the board's findings and conclusions, to any appropriate administrative authority for disciplinary action or other suitable remedial action; the board, although it has no independent administrative authority, may make any recommendation to any city administrator at any level of supervision, if the board finds that the recommendation will advance the objectives of this division. 
(m)  After it has made its final determination, the board shall issue its written findings of fact and conclusions and may issue any additional reports, opinions and recommendations as it deems necessary. All such reports shall be in compliance with all state and city laws governing confidentiality, open government, and torts. All such reports shall be reviewed by the city attorney prior to issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 17), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-156. - Elected officials. 
If the board makes a finding that the conduct of an elected official constitutes a breach of the oath of office of that elected official, the matter shall be referred to the appropriate administrative authority for disciplinary action, prosecution or other suitable remedial action in accordance with applicable state or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 18), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-157. - Ex parte communications. 
After a complaint has been filed and during the pendency of a complaint before the board, no member of the board or alternate may communicate directly or indirectly with any party or other person about any issue of fact or law regarding the complaint, except that: 
(1)  The members of the board may obtain legal advice from the city attorney and may discuss the complaint with their staff; and 
(2)  The members of the board and alternates may discuss the complaint at a lawfully conducted meeting. 
If any person attempts to communicate with a board member or alternate regarding the pending complaint, the board member or alternate shall report the substance of the communication to the board on the public record at the next meeting or hearing of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 19), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-158. - Confidentiality of board information. 
No member of the board, alternate, or any public servant who has access to any confidential information related to the functions or activities of the board shall divulge that information to any person not authorized to have it. The identity of a person who requests a confidential advisory ethics opinion is confidential, as is information describing or pertaining to any organization mentioned, if the disclosure of the information could lead to the disclosure of the identity of the person requesting the confidential advisory opinion. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 20), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-159. - Waiver of confidentiality. 
A person who makes or purports to make public the substance of or any portion of an advisory opinion requested by or on behalf of that person is deemed to have waived the confidentiality of the request for an advisory opinion and of any records obtained or prepared by the board in connection with the request. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 21), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-160. - Statute of limitations. 
A complaint shall be filed within six months from the date that the complainant knew or should have known of the action that is alleged to be a violation of this division, and in no event shall the board of ethics consider a complaint which has been filed more than one year after a violation of this division is alleged to have occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-14, § 1(ch. 6, § 22), 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-06, 2-17-2009) 
Secs. 2-161—2-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-189. - Authorization. 
The following departments are established by the council: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Finance. 
(3)  Community development. 
(4)  Transportation. 
(5)  Public works. 
(6)  Police. 
(7)  Fire and EMS. 
(8)  Parks and recreation. 
(9)  Building. 
(10)  E-911. 
(11)  Municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 4, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-190. - Oversight. 
(a)  At the election of the city manager, each department may have a department head or its equivalent. That department head shall be responsible for the day-to-day management of each department and shall report and make recommendations to the city manager from time to time. 
(b)  The city manager or his designate shall supervise each department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 4, § 3), 12-19-2006) 
Secs. 2-191—2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-201. - Composition of police department. 
The police force of the city shall consist of such officers and employees as shall be determined by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-40, § 2(ch. 15, art. 2, § 1.1), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-202. - Chief's duties. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be the chief administrative officer of the police force and shall be responsible for the orderly and efficient operation of the police department. The police chief will be responsible for gaining and keeping the department nationally accredited under the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA) and certified by the Georgia Chiefs of Police. The chief will also establish and maintain policies that meet CALEA standards or other model policies established by the International Association of Chiefs of Police, the Georgia Association of Chiefs of Police. 
(b)  The chief of police, in general, and department personnel under his or her direction shall: 
(1)  Attend any meetings of the council at the request of the council or the city manager; 
(2)  Execute all lawful orders and directions of the city manager; 
(3)  Abate or remove any nuisance when so directed by the city manager; 
(4)  Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city through enforcement of all municipal ordinances and state or federal laws. The police officers shall have all patrol and arrest powers granted by state law; 
(5)  Under the general direction of the city manager, be in charge of the police department and have supervision over the personnel thereof in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority and in hiring, discharging or suspending any members within the parameters of the City Charter, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations, civil service laws and any other appropriate statute; 
(6)  Enter or cause to be entered on the city's uniform traffic citation, and into the official record, all available information pertaining to individuals charged or arrested for violation of ordinances and state law; 
(7)  Serve all subpoenas and warrants of the municipal court and the city council and as otherwise authorized by law; 
(8)  Issue and serve summons for violations of law or ordinance and serve all processes, executions, attachments for the city clerk, municipal court or the city council; 
(9)  Render such aid and assistance to the county health director as may be necessary to enforce in the city all health laws of this state and regulations pertaining to health of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-40, § 2(ch. 15, art. 2, § 1.2), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-203. - Public safety personnel; prompt response to emergencies. 
The purpose of this division is to ensure the prompt response of police personnel as defined herein in times of emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-40, § 2(ch. 15, art. 2, § 1.3), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-204. - Police attendance at trials. 
It shall be the duty of each police officer making an arrest or having knowledge of the case for or against the defendant to attend the trial of any person brought before the municipal court and other courts where a case may be heard. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-40, § 2(ch. 15, art. 2, § 1.4), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-205. - Traffic violations; prosecution. 
A citation issued by the police department can only be reduced by the city solicitor. Any citation that is voided must be done in city municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-40, § 2(ch. 15, art. 2, § 1.5), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 2-206. - Sale of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Bicycles and other unclaimed personal property, except firearms and weapons, not marked as evidence, in the possession of the police department for a period of 90 days and after an effort has been made by the police department to ascertain the ownership of such property and to notify the owner, shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, after publishing notice of such sale as required by O.C.G.A. § 44-14-411. The proceeds of any sale made under this section shall be disbursed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 44-14-412. 
(b)  Unclaimed firearms and weapons in the possession of the police department for a period of 90 days, not marked as evidence and after an effort has been made to notify the owner, shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Destroyed by the property and evidence custodian. 
(2)  Receipted to the police department for their use in training or operations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-40, § 2(ch. 15, art. 2, § 1.6), 7-10-2007) 
Secs. 2-207—2-218. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND ADVISORY COMMITTEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2.13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-219—2-244. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONADVISORY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-245. - Creation. 
Unless stated otherwise, the provisions of this article apply to the board of appeals, design review board, historic preservation board, planning board, construction board of appeals, hospitality board and alcohol licensing and appeals board, which shall have the powers and duties and be subject to and governed by the regulations set forth in this article and this Code. The duties of each board are defined in the corresponding section of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 5, § 1), 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 2009-03-12, 3-17-2009) 
Charter reference— Authority to create departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies, § 1.03(b)(17). 
Sec. 2-246. - Appointment of members. 
All board members must be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the council except as otherwise mandated by state law. This section applies to all boards created by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 5, §§ 2, 3), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 2.13(a). 
Sec. 2-247. - Membership. 
(a)  Members of boards may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Each board member must be a resident of the city. Should the board member move out of the city, he may remain active until the mayor and council appoint his replacement. 
(c)  Members must attend two-thirds of meetings in a calendar year. Failure to do so warrants removal from the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 5, §§ 2, 3), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Compensation of members, § 2.13(f). 
Sec. 2-248. - Terms. 
(a)  Each board member shall serve a specified term of not more than four years. Consecutive terms are permissible. Each board member shall have equal terms of an amount to be specified by the council. 
(b)  No member of any board shall hold any elective office in the city. Councilmembers and the mayor, however, may serve as ex officio members of such boards, commissions, or authorities, without a vote. 
(c)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or any applicable state law. A consecutive appointment is permissible. 
(d)  Any member may be removed from office for cause, by a vote of a majority of the members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 5, § 4), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Holding elective office by board members, § 2.13(b); vacancies on boards, § 2.13(c); removal of board members, § 2.13(e). 
Sec. 2-249. - Quorum. 
A majority of actual board members establishes a quorum. Any action taken requires a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 5, § 5), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-250. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each of the boards shall make its rules of procedure and determine its time of meetings. The date and time of each meeting, as well as agenda items to be considered, shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the council. 
(b)  Each of the boards shall elect, annually, at its first meeting of the calendar year, one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(c)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records maintained by the committee shall be public records unless expressly excepted by O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.). The boards shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting closed sessions when permitted by the Georgia Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.)) and Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.)). 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 5, § 6), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Authority to enact rules and regulations, election of chairperson, § 2.13(g). 
Secs. 2-251—2-278. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADVISORY COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-279. - Authorization. 
The council may establish advisory committees. The mayor is an ex officio member of every committee. The city manager or a designee shall oversee the meetings of each committee and is an ex-officio, nonvoting, member of each. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 3, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-280. - Duties. 
(a)  Each committee shall, from time to time, propose policies and ordinances to the council in the subjects germane to the committee. 
(b)  This section shall not be interpreted to require committee approval for a measure to be heard before the council. 
(c)  Members must attend two-thirds of meetings in a calendar year. Failure to do so warrants removal from the committee by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 3, § 2), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-281. - Membership. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the council shall establish qualifications for members of each committee. Each committee person shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the council. 
(b)  Each committee member must be a resident of the city. Should the committee member move out of the city, he may remain active until the mayor and council appoint his replacement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 3, § 3), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-282. - Terms. 
(a)  Each committee member shall serve a specified term of not more than four years or until the committee completes its business. Consecutive terms are permissible. 
(b)  Members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. A consecutive appointment is permissible. 
(c)  Any member may be removed with or without cause by the mayor and a majority of the councilmembers. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 3, § 4), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-283. - Compensation. 
Committee members may serve without compensation. Reasonable expenses for travel may be reimbursed, and committee members may be compensated pursuant to a policy to be established by the city manager and approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 3, § 5), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-284. - Quorum. 
A majority of actual committee members establishes a quorum. Any action taken requires a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 3, § 6), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-285. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each of the committees shall make its rules of procedure and determine its time of meetings. The date and time of each meeting, as well as agenda items to be considered, shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the council. 
(b)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records maintained by the committee shall be public records unless expressly excepted by a provision of Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.). The committees shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question; and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the city council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. 
(c)  Expenditures of the committees, if any, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose intended by the council during the annual budgeting process. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 3, § 7), 12-19-2006) 
Secs. 2-286—2-303. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, § 5.01 et seq. 

Sec. 2-304. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall be July 1 through June 30. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-14, 12-13-2005) 
Charter reference— Fiscal year, § 5.01. 
Sec. 2-305. - Nonprofit funding. 
The nonprofit funding policy, as amended from time to time and approved by the city council, is adopted by reference as if set forth in full herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-06, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 2-306. - Financial management plan. 
The financial management plan, as amended from time to time and approved by the city council, is adopted by reference as if set forth in full herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-04, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 2006-07-45, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 2-307. - Finance director to serve as city tax collector, city treasurer and city accountant; miscellaneous functions. 
(a)  The functions of the city tax collector, city accountant and city treasurer shall be performed by the finance director. 
(b)  The finance director shall perform at least the following duties: 
(1)  Managing, planning, directing, and maintaining the city's financial operations, including serving as chair of the city finance department, if such a department is established; 
(2)  Directing and supervising the work of personnel involved in performing the accounting, utility billing, property tax, payroll, and purchasing functions for the city; 
(3)  Providing technical leadership in budgeting, overseeing, and directing investment opportunities and debt administration, as well as ensuring proper record retention policies are strictly followed; 
(4)  Managing, planning, and directing the collection of all city taxes; and 
(5)  Notifying delinquent taxpayers of their status in accordance with state law. 
The council may require the finance director to perform other duties. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 6, §§ 1, 2), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Tax collector, § 3.10; city accountant, § 3.11. 
Secs. 2-308—2-332. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to contract, § 1.03(b)(6). 

Sec. 2-333. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any terms not defined by this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them elsewhere in this Code. 
City finance director means the city accountant, his agent, or the chair of the city finance department, if such a department is created or is in existence. 
City manager means the top executive/administrative position appointed by the city council and has the authority to execute and approve contracts, purchase orders, and change orders within his delegated authority. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, improving, or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. The term "construction" does not include the routine operation, repair and/or maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property. 
Contract means any city agreement, regardless of form or title, for the procurement or disposition of goods, commodities, and services. 
Employee means an individual drawing a salary or wage from the city, whether on a full-time or part-time basis. The term shall encompass all members of the city council without regard to whether or not such individual is compensated. 
Gifts or favors means any thing or any service of value. 
Goods or commodities means supplies, apparatus, materials, equipment, and other forms of tangible personal property. 
Payment terms means two percent net 20. 
Purchase order means the document used by the city to obtain supplies, goods, commodities, and services from vendors. 
Purchasing agent means the principal purchasing official of the city pursuant to section 2-334. 
Vendor means one who sells goods or services; a supplier. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 7, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-334. - Purchasing agent. 
The purchasing agent shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies, and contractual services for the city or any using agency; arrange and negotiate for the sale or otherwise dispose of all surplus equipment and supplies or real estate of the city or any using agency; 
(2)  Maintain a perpetual or periodic inventory record of all materials, supplies, or equipment stored in city storerooms, warehouses, and elsewhere, including monthly reports that provide: 
a.  The titles of all requests for proposals and the method of source selections to be used; 
b.  All contracts authorized by the council, the method of source selection used, and the total dollar amount; 
c.  All emergency contracts awarded pursuant to this article; 
d.  All change orders or contract modifications authorized by the council, the dollar amount, and the reason; 
e.  All change orders or contract modifications authorized by the purchasing agent, the dollar amount, and the reason; and 
f.  An explanation of any changes, and the costs involved, in the scope of services made between the time a contract is awarded and the time that a resolution authorizing the contract is sent to the council for adoption; 
(3)  Control and supervise all city storerooms and warehouses, unless otherwise provided in this Code; 
(4)  Develop and maintain a purchasing policy and procedure manual which will be updated by the purchasing agent periodically; 
(5)  Direct efforts to procure services through advertisements of bids as required by this article and by state law; 
(6)  Require bonds, insurance, and other forms of protection for the city on the process of procuring goods and services for the city; 
(7)  Terminate solicitations for bids for any goods or services when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest to do so, including termination for breach of contract or anticipated breach of contract; 
(8)  Reject any and all bids when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest; 
(9)  Consult with the city attorney if a contracting party breaches or is reasonably anticipated to breach its contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 7, § 2), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-335. - Legal representation. 
The city attorney represents the city in all legal matters and has the authority to provide standard terms and conditions of contracts and purchase orders and approves various negotiated terms and conditions as determined by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 7, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 2-336. - Purchasing policy. 
The purchasing policy, as amended from time to time and approved by the city council, is adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcohol generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.). 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed pursuant to this chapter who provides alcohol at authorized events or functions, special events, or special events facilities. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. In calculating the total annual gross food and beverage sales for any such establishment for the purpose of determining whether the establishment constitutes an 'eating establishment' as defined herein, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, as authorized pursuant to subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, or to the public for consumption off the premises in accordance with subparagraphs (A) and (D) of paragraph (2), paragraph (3) and paragraph (4) of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36, shall not be used. 
Church means any permanent place of public religious worship. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell or otherwise dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the state. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Growler means a bottle capable of being sealed with a tamper-proof cap, top or other seal for the purpose of complying with open container laws, and further provided that the container may hold not less than 12 ounces, but not to exceed 68 ounces, and is filled with malt beverage drawn from a barrel, cask, tank, or keg by a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, holding a package malt beverage license issued by the city. 
Immediate family of a person means all persons related to such person by consanguinity or affinity within the first degree, as computed according to the law of the state. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Registered agent means that individual, who is a resident of the county and at least 21 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon a licensee or owner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.1.2), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2012-06-14, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 2012-07-27, 7-17-2012; Ord. No. 2016-04-07 , § I, 4-5-2016) 
State Law reference— Definitions generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1. 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalties for violation. 
Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, any person who violates this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 for each offense and/or up to six months incarceration. Should the violation and conviction be of a state law, the punishment shall be by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and/or up to 12 months incarceration. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.9.1), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-3. - Purposes of chapter. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; 
(4)  Promotion of appropriate land use and zoning and the effectuation of the city's land use and zoning policies; 
(5)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  To the maximum extent possible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.1.1), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-4. - Notice. 
Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this chapter, any required notice may be delivered by hand or posted by certified mail, in which event delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.19), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-5. - Collection of sums due. 
As to any failure to pay any sum due for fees or taxes under this chapter, the city may issue an execution against the licensee and his property for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax in addition to any other remedies the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.20), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-6. - Sale to or purchase or possession by underage person. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining unlawfully any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(4) of this section shall not apply when the parent or guardian of the underage person gives the alcoholic beverage to the underage person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be violated when a person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, the person's photograph, and the person's date of birth. Proper identification includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A., §§ 40-5-100—40-5-104. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under 21 years of age in a licensed premises if such employment is lawful under section 6-162. 
(f)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could doubt whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is 21 years of age or older, the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage shall request to see and be furnished with proper identification as provided in subsection (d) of this section. The failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(g)  In any case where a person selling or otherwise furnishing alcoholic beverages checks for a proper identification, such person shall carefully inspect such identification. If a reasonably prudent person could determine that such identification has been altered and if such person sells or otherwise furnishes alcoholic beverages to the holder of such altered identification, then such may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(h)  For purposes of the prohibitions set forth in this section, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond shall constitute a conviction. 
(i)  With reference to the prohibitions set forth in this section, if there is a change in a majority of a licensee's owners, partners, or shareholders, the offenses under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; provided, however, a different corporation, partnership, or other association shall be charged with the offenses of the predecessor if a majority of the owners, partners, or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.4), 9-18-2007) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-7. - Carry-out of alcoholic beverage unlawful. 
(a)  Except as provided for in division 7 of article II of this chapter, all alcoholic beverages sold or otherwise dispensed for consumption on the licensed premises shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises, and it shall be unlawful for the licensee to permit any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. The licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing and as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4, any eating establishment in Sandy Springs which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron, who has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of a bottle of wine, to remove one partially consumed bottle of wine off premises, if the bottle of wine has been securely resealed by the licensee, placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and has a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal attached by the licensee. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(b)  Except as provided for in division 7 of article II of this chapter, each consumption on the premises licensee shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: 
It is a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sandy Springs to take any type alcoholic beverage out of this establishment unless specifically permitted by state law and Sandy Springs ordinance. Such sign shall be in uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person purchasing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to leave the premises without paying for such alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Except as provided for in division 7 of article II of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for customers to gather outside the establishment of a consumption on the premises licensee and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  Except as provided for in division 7 of article II of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for the manager or any employee of a consumption on the premises licensee to allow persons to gather outside the establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.14), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2014-12-44 , 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 2018-07-24 , § I, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-8. - Brownbagging; when BYOB is allowed. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage in any business establishment without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages except for the following specific exceptions: 
(1)  This section shall not prohibit any person dining at an eating establishment licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises from bringing an unopened bottle of wine into said establishment for consumption where such eating establishment has a policy permitting same. 
(2)  This section shall not prohibit any person who is a patron of a business establishment which provides as its primary business art instruction, sewing and embroidery instruction, or cooking instruction from bringing one unopened bottle of wine into the establishment where: (a) the owners or their agents have a policy permitting a patron to bring an unopened bottle of wine into the business establishment for consumption on the premises by the patron; and (b) the business establishment is licensed as required hereinafter. 
(3)  This section shall not prohibit any person who is a patron of a business establishment which provides as its primary business art instruction, sewing and embroidery instruction, or cooking instruction from bringing no more than two unopened 16-ounce containers of beer, or the equivalent, into the establishment where: (a) the owners or their agents have a policy permitting a patron to bring an unopened bottle of beer as described into the business establishment for consumption on the premises by the patron; and (b) the retail establishment is licensed as required hereinafter. 
(4)  Any wine not consumed at a business establishment, as described in subsection (2) of this section, shall be disposed of at the premises and not carried out in an open container, unless the business establishment is able to reseal and repackage the opened bottle of wine as required by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(5)  Any beer opened and not consumed at a business establishment, as described in subsection (3) of this section, shall be disposed of at the premises and not carried out in an unsealed container. 
(6)  A business establishment, as described in subsections (2) and (3) of this section, licensed as required, may have available for its patrons use, either for a fee or not, glasses and openers for the patrons' use. 
(7)  A business establishment, as described in subsections (2) and (3) of this section, shall be a licensed business by the city and meet all application requirements for a brown bagging beer and wine license and be governed by the ordinance provisions set forth in division 2 of article II of this chapter except as to the attendant fees. Further, such a business establishment so licensed shall not have any employee under the age of 18 working in the establishment and shall have an established closing time no later than 10:00 p.m. The attendant application fee for a business establishment, as described in subsections (2) and (3) hereinabove shall be in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by the city council. 
(8)  All applicable state laws and city ordinances which address the use and serving of alcoholic beverages shall apply to this section, unless otherwise specifically provided hereinabove. 
(9)  For purposes of this section, the term business establishment shall not include a private hotel room or other similar guest room or a private club. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01-01, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 2017-04-08 , 4-18-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-01-01, adopted Jan. 3, 2012, amended § 6-8 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 6-8 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.15), adopted Sept. 18, 2007; Ord. No. 2010-06-23, adopted June 15, 2010. 
Secs. 6-9—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VENDORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation and licensing of alcohol sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Sales and consumption on public property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section and division 7 of article II of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverage in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property. 
(b)  Private parties and organizations may secure a permit from the city manager to serve, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages on property owned or leased by the city. 
(c)  An outdoor festival host holding the required special event permit may allow or prohibit alcohol consumption at the outdoor festival in a city park and shall have the right to require that alcohol consumed at the outdoor festival be purchased or obtained from an official outdoor festival vendor. Such authorization and/or limitations shall be set forth on the application for the special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.4.2), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2018-07-24 , § I, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-32. - Open area patio sales. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises structure. 
(b)  A consumption licensee may sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages in a patio/open area type environment if approved by the city manager to do so, and so long as said patio/open area is not located on the city right-of-way and is otherwise not blocking the safe passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention, or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.4.3), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2017-03-06 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Secs. 6-33—6-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-51. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front: "This license is a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled and is subject to the laws of Georgia and the existing and any further ordinances of the City of Sandy Springs." 
(c)  The applicant for a license or permit, for which provision is made in this chapter, shall be subject to all state laws and regulations and to all city ordinances and regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages, except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.1), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-52. - Retail package licenses. 
(a)  Applicants may apply for one or more of the following type retail licenses: 
(1)  Package malt beverage license. Retail sale of malt beverages in the original package and retail sale of growlers as authorized herein. 
(2)  Package wine license. Retail sale of wine in the original package. 
(3)  Package distilled spirits license. Retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.2), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2016-04-07 , § II, 4-5-2016) 
State Law reference— Maximum license fee for package sales of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 6-53. - Retail consumption on the premises licenses. 
(a)  Five classes of retail consumption on the premises licenses are available. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, retail consumption on the premises licenses are available only to eating establishments. 
(1)  Full pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and beer by the drink 
(2)  Limited pouring license. Retail sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the drink. 
(3)  Limited pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(4)  Brewpub. See section 6-1(b). 
(5)  Farm winery tasting room. See section 6-108. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. Sunday sales may be made, upon payment of an additional fee, as set by resolution of the city council, provided the licensee otherwise meets the qualifying requirements for Sunday sales. Service from more than one bar at a licensed location may be made upon payment of an additional fee per bar, as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.3), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-54. - Wholesale licenses. 
(a)  Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who does not have a place of business in the city shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages in the city upon application for such license to the city manager, submittal of an annual renewal affidavit, and a statement that he understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of the city and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. Distributors whose principal place of business is a location other than the city shall pay a registration fee of $100.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). 
(b)  Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. The application for a resident wholesale dealer's license shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.4), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-55. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(a)  License requirements for resident caterers. 
(1)  Any caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales at authorized catered event or function. 
(2)  Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid only for the event for which the license is issued. The fee for each license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
(b)  Permit requirements for nonresident caterers. 
(1)  A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city manager. The fee for each such permit shall be $50.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). 
(2)  An application for an event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or functions. 
(3)  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off-premises except as authorized by the event permit. 
(c)  Limitation on license. A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(d)  Sunday sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event or function on Sunday must possess a valid Sunday sales license and comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(e)  Tax on sales by resident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in article III of this chapter. 
(f)  Tax on drinks served by nonresident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article III of this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.5), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-56. - Nonprofit civic organization temporary permit. 
(a)  To be eligible to apply for a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide nonprofit organization must be the applicant; a nonprofit authorization letter (federal form 501-C) must be produced; any required event permit must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(b)  Pursuant to state law, a temporary permit shall authorize the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises for a period not to exceed one day, subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages; the temporary permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit; and no more than two such permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one calendar year. 
(c)  Each application for such a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.6), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-57. - Duration of licenses. 
All licenses, except as otherwise indicated, issued under this chapter shall be issued on a calendar-year basis, and all licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year for which they are issued. License fees shall be prorated as follows: New applications received on and between January 1 and June 30 shall be assessed the full license fee. New applications received on and between July 1 and December 31 shall be assessed one-half of the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.7), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-58. - Individual, business or association entities; named licensee. 
(a)  A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of the partner or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises, who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the stockholder, officer of the corporation, or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises, who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a purely nonprofit civic, fraternal, patriotic, private, or social club or corporation which is organized and conducted in the city solely as a mutual benefit membership group shall be issued in the name of the club or corporation and in the name of the individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter, and the named individual shall be named licensee. 
(b)  The individual completing and presenting an application for a license, whether for himself, a partnership, a corporation, or a nonprofit organization, shall meet the requirements of this chapter so as to be the named licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.8), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-59. - Joint responsibility. 
If a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If a corporation, the corporation, its officers and directors shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If a nonprofit organization, its officers, directors, or governing authority shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.9), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-60. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)  Every applicant shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter, and the application shall constitute a certification applicant has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages concerning the relevant provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  An applicant shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section, a licensee shall not be considered active unless he is an owner, stockholder, or fulltime employee of the licensed business and is present on the licensed premises a minimum of ten hours per week. 
(c)  A licensee must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. Any such alien shall have been lawfully admitted for permanent residence for at least one year prior to application. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, a licensee for the retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package must have been a resident of a county or municipality in the state, in which the retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package is legal, for one year immediately preceding the filing of the application for such license. 
(e)  No person, including members of a retail dealer licensee's immediate family, shall be issued, nor shall have a beneficial interest in, more than two package distilled spirits licenses issued in this state. 
(f)  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the ten years preceding his application of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any sexual-related crime, or any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes or gambling, except as otherwise provided herein. A licensee shall not have more than one conviction within the ten years preceding his application of any misdemeanor criminal offense related to alcoholic beverages including, but not limited to, illegal possession, sale, or use of alcoholic beverages, or more than one conviction for any misdemeanor criminal offense relating to the illegal possession, sale, or use of any controlled substance. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered. 
(g)  A licensee shall not have had revoked, within the five years preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(h)  A licensee shall have, and continuously maintain, as a registered agent a resident of the county upon whom may be served any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner. The registered agent must be a resident of at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.10), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2012-12-39, § 1, 12-18-2012; Ord. No. 2014-04-10 , § 1(1), 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 6-61. - Alcohol awareness training certification required. 
(a)  The applicant for a license under this article shall present to the city manager current certification of attendance at an approved alcohol awareness training program. Such certification or approved alternative program shall be verified and signed off by the chief of police. 
(b)  If the applicant lacks such training and certification, the applicant shall have 30 days from the date of the granting of the license to complete the training and submit certification to the city manager. Upon due cause being shown, the city manager may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 60 days, to complete said training. Failure to timely obtain such certification shall be grounds for revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(c)  Every applicant to whom a pouring permit is issued and all managerial staff of a licensee shall also complete an approved alcohol awareness training program within 30 days of being issued a pouring permit, being employed as a part of any managerial staff, or being issued a license in the case of the named individual licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.11), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-62. - Distance from churches, schools, etc. 
(a)  No package malt beverage license, package wine license, or consumption on the premises license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(b)  No package distilled spirits license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any church building or alcoholic treatment center or which is located within 200 yards of a school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus or which is located within 500 yards of another licensed package distilled spirits business. 
(c)  No package license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 200 feet of a private single-family or two-family dwelling in a zoning district that permits single-family and/or two-family dwellings; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a private dwelling located in a zoning district in which alcoholic beverage outlets are authorized and which dwelling is on the same street as the premises for which a package license is applied. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine the distances referred to in this section shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure, as determined by the director of community development, from which alcoholic beverages are sold or proposed to be sold; and 
(2)  In a straight path of travel by the nearest public sidewalk, street, road, or highway; 
(3)  To the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the grounds, as determined by the director of community development, whichever is applicable under this chapter. 
No license shall be revoked and no application for a license or renewal shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection, if such license or license application or renewal application is for premises for which a license was granted prior to the enactment of this chapter in reliance on another method of measurement. 
(e)  No application for a license shall be approved which does not include, or have attached thereto, a current certificate from a registered surveyor which shows a scale drawing of the premises and the location at which the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet and which shows, with linear foot measurements where appropriate, such location's compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this section, or a certificate from a registered surveyor which states that the subject alcoholic beverage outlet meets all of the location and distance requirements of this chapter, and shows such location's compliance or noncompliance with linear foot measurements where appropriate or required. 
(f)  When a license application is for premises not yet constructed or not yet completed, a license may be issued if the application includes the plans for the premises and a surveyor's certificate, as required under subsection (e) of this section, clearly showing that the premises will, when completed, meet the requirements of this section. 
(g)  If the distance requirements of this section are met at the time a license is issued, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the prohibited distance shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the issuance of a new license to a subsequent owner of the property; provided, however, that as to any new license, the prior license must have been lawful and validly issued at the location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding the application for the new license. 
(h)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at any other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools and private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. The term "church building" as used in this section shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.4.1), 9-18-2007) 
State Law reference— Sales near churches or schools, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-63. - Application fee. 
Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.12), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-64. - Application; investigation consent. 
(a)  All applications for licenses shall be made upon application forms provided by the city. All applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts as determined by the city manager to be relevant to the requirements of this chapter and further shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners and a copy of the partnership agreement; 
(2)  If a corporation, the names of the officers, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock and a copy of the articles of incorporation; and 
(3)  The name of any other entity having a financial interest in the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(b)  Each applicant and licensee shall consent to and authorize a fingerprint analysis and investigation. 
(c)  The application form shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease to the premises, or proof of ownership of the premises, or proof of other authorization for use of the premises. 
(d)  Each applicant and licensee authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the license applied for, either before or after the issuance of the license. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information, and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents for obtaining and using such information. 
(e)  Separate applications must be made for each location, and separate licenses must be issued for each location. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.13), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-65. - Procedure for consideration of application; temporary licenses. 
(a)  The city manager shall promptly refer a copy of each application to the chief of police or his designee for a thorough investigation. The chief of police or his designee shall report his findings to the city manager. Such finding shall include a recommendation as to the qualifications of the applicant. The city manager shall further have the responsibility and authority to request additional information as may be determined to be necessary in order for the city manager to accept the application as complete prior to its submission to the city council. 
(b)  A temporary license for a full pouring license, a limited pouring license, package malt beverage license, and package wine license may be issued by the city manager for a period of up to 60 days provided the city manager is satisfied that the applicant substantially complies with the provisions of the applicable ordinances and meets required qualifications and the denial of a temporary license would create undue hardship upon the applicant,, such as the closing of an existing business or delaying of the opening of a new business. The applicant shall sign an acknowledgment that the temporary license is a mere accommodation and may be revoked, with or without cause, by the city manager at any time. The city manager is also authorized to extend the period of the temporary license up to an additional 60 days if, at least three business days prior to the expiration of the temporary license, or any extension thereof, the applicant requests, and explains why, an extension is needed and the city manager finds the factual circumstances surrounding the request to support the granting of an extension. Should an applicant have reason to seek an extension beyond the additional 60 days and if the city manager finds the factual circumstances surrounding the additional extension request to support the granting, then the city manager shall present the request to council at the next regular session of council. 
(c)  The fee for issuance of a temporary license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.14), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2016-06-17 , 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 6-66. - Denial of application. 
(a)  After a hearing, should the city council deny an application, written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant by the city manager, shall set forth the reason for the denial, and advise the applicant of the right to appeal. 
(b)  Any decision by the city council denying an application shall be final unless the applicant applies to the Superior Court of Fulton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council. 
(c)  In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.15), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-67. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. All applications seeking a transfer of a license, except as provided in subparagraph (b) below, shall be made upon application forms provided by the city manager and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  A licensee may transfer a license to another location within the city limits without making original application and without payment of the fee referred to in subparagraph (a) above, provided the new location meets all requirements of the Code and state law. In such circumstances, the licensee seeking a transfer of a license shall make application for the transfer on application forms provided by the city manager. 
(c)  In the case of death of an owner of a license, no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall apply to the city manager for authorization. The establishment shall then be allowed to continue to operate for a period of 60 days from the date of death, until expiration of the license, or until the approval of a new license, whichever shall first occur. 
(d)  A change in ownership status of the licensed establishment that does not change the actual ownership interest shall be eligible to apply for a transfer of license as provided herein. By way of example, a sole proprietor who decides to incorporate and be the sole shareholder of the new corporation, although in such circumstances information required from a corporation in an original application shall be provided. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided, such withdrawal shall not introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business without application for and issuance of a new license. 
(f)  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, a change in the named individual licensee may be permitted by the city manager if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(g)  In the circumstances described in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the city manager determines that the change results in a failure to meet requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.16), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2013-01-01, 2-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-68. - Sale or disposition of licensed business; temporary license. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells, or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the city manager. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, the city manager may issue a temporary license as provided in section 6-65 to the successor in interest, if the successor in interest has properly completed an application and paid the appropriate fee. The temporary license shall be valid for up to 60 days or until the application for a permanent license is granted or denied by the city council, which ever first occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.17), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-69. - License renewal. 
(a)  An application for renewal shall be in the form of a sworn and notarized statement by the named licensee, on a form provided by the city manager, stating that there have been no changes in any of the information contained in the original application. If there have been any substantive changes, the application for renewal shall be in the same form as an original application. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall be filed no later than November 15 and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in the amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Renewal applications and payments not received by November 15 shall incur a late fee. Renewal applications and payments received between November 16 and December 15 are subject to a ten percent late fee. Businesses failing to apply for renewal of their licenses prior to December 15 must reapply for a license. 
(d)  Businesses required to reapply for a license, as provided in subsection (c), and filing this application for a new license after January 1 shall pay at the time of filing the required application fee, the annual fee, and the ten percent late fee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.2.18), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-70. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept in the public area plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.2), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-71. - Suspension or revocation. 
Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city council for any violation of this chapter; for any violation of state laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages; for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license; or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(2)  When suspension of a license is permitted under this chapter, but no specific period of suspension is mandated, the following guidelines shall apply: 
a.  First suspension in a 12-month period of time shall not exceed 30 days. 
b.  Second suspension in a 12-month period of time shall not exceed 60 days. 
c.  Third suspension in a 12-month period of time shall cause revocation of the license and result in the inability of the licensee to obtain a license from the city for a term of three years from the date of revocation. 
(3)  Prior to the suspension or revocation of a license by the city council, the city manager shall give written notice to the licensee of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing before the city council shall be held in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. Service of such notice shall be by personal service on the registered agent. If personal service fails, the notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the registered agent at the address provided and to the named licensee at the licensed premises. Delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.3.1, 7.3.2), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2009-11-55, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 6-72. - Hearings. 
(a)  The city council shall hear applications for licenses, as well as all matters relating to such licenses or otherwise under this chapter, including, but not being limited to, suspensions, revocations, transfers, renewals, changes of ownership, and any other matters affecting such licenses. All applications, whether for an original license, renewal license, or otherwise, must be complete in all requirements of law to be scheduled and heard by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall have the authority to defer a decision and continue hearings to the next regularly scheduled council meeting, when necessary. 
(c)  Applicants and licensees shall be given written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose when the matter at issue will be heard. The applicant or licensee shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence. Ten days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but a shorter or longer period of notice shall be authorized as the city manager deems the circumstances to justify; provided, however, that the initial hearing is scheduled to take place not later than 45 days from the date the matter comes before the city manager for scheduling. Service of notice shall be in accordance with section 6-71(a)(3). 
(d)  Upon close of the public hearing, the city council shall reach a decision on the matter before it. The decision of the city council shall be spread upon and entered in the city council minutes and shall be final unless the applicant or licensee applies to the Superior Court of Fulton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11-55, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 6-73—6-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSUMPTION ON-PREMISES LICENSES AND LICENSEES 

Sec. 6-101. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)  A consumption on the premises license may be granted only to the establishments described in this article and subject to the specified conditions. 
(b)  Full-service kitchen as used in this article shall mean a kitchen with a three- compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health department and city fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.1), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-102. - Hotel and hotel room service. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a hotel must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where food is served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered to guests for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain 50 or more rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of guests; and 
(3)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities. 
(b)  A hotel may consist of a single building or may consist of two or more buildings located on the same premises and used in connection with the hotel operation. 
(c)  A facility which is styled as a motel, motor lodge, inn, or other similar appellation may be licensed as a hotel if it meets the requirements of this section. 
(d)  A hotel may grant permission for the operation of a lounge, restaurant, or supper club on its premises; such an operation may be granted a consumption on the premises license if it meets the other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any hotel (as the term "hotel" is commonly used and without regard to the requirements of this section), inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire, may provide in-room service of alcoholic beverages if such establishment: 
(1)  Holds a valid city package license or a valid city consumption on the premises license or both; and 
(2)  Has been authorized to provide in-room service by the state revenue commissioner. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, "in-room service" consists of: 
(1)  The delivery of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages by an employee of the hotel to a registered guest's room when such alcoholic beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and 
(2)  The provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guest room which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, in-room service of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations in this chapter relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages. In-room service sales shall be authorized only on such days and only during such hours as the sale of alcoholic beverages is otherwise authorized. 
(h)  Distilled spirits sold pursuant to this section shall not be sold in packages containing less than 50 milliliters each. 
(i)  All alcoholic beverages sold pursuant to this section shall be purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer and shall be subject to all taxes imposed under this chapter, including the excise tax on the retail sale by the drink of alcoholic beverages containing distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.2), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-103. - Restaurants. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a restaurant must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly served to the public for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(4)  Have at least 50 percent of its total sales be the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines. For this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(b)  Brewpubs, as defined in section 6-1(b) and O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(3), shall be allowed in eating establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.3), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-104. - Lounges. 
(a)  A lounge is a separate room that has a seating capacity, at tables of at least 50 persons and which is: 
(1)  Connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant; or 
(2)  Located in a hotel. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a lounge must be arranged and maintained such that all booths, stools, and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other customers in the lounge. 
(c)  A lounge which is operated on a different floor, or in a separate building, from, or which is not connected or adjacent to, another licensed facility shall be considered a separate establishment from such other licensed facility and shall pay a separate annual license fee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.4), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-105. - Supper clubs. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a supper club must: 
(1)  Have a seating capacity, at tables, of at least 100 persons; 
(2)  Have adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its patrons, except that this requirement shall not apply to a supper club which is located in a hotel having separate kitchen facilities of which the supper club makes use; 
(3)  Provide a band or other professional entertainment a minimum of 20 days in each calendar month, each and every calendar month of the calendar year, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating; 
(4)  Be arranged and maintained such that all booths and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other persons in the facility; 
(5)  Serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(6)  Have as at least 50 percent of its total sales the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines; and for this purpose, if a supper club makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.5), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-106. - Private clubs. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a nonprofit association which is organized under the laws of the state and which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofit purposes; 
(4)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(4)c of this section, a "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Tips or gratuities added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food; provided, however, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.6), 9-18-2007) 
State Law reference— Sale of spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1. 
Sec. 6-107. - Special events facility. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a special events facility must: 
(1)  Be available to public or private groups of persons; 
(2)  For monetary consideration on a rental, fee, percentage, or similar basis, be used primarily for special occasions, including but not limited to, receptions, meetings, banquets, conventions, parties, catered events, or similar gatherings; and 
(3)  Be open to or attended by invited or selected guests or paying patrons; or 
(4)  Be a multisport complex situated on at least 20 acres and in conformance with the city's zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.7), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-108. - Farm winery tasting room. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the state. 
Special entertainment district means a certain area within the city designated by the council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2 solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for retail sale of such wine as provided by law. Samples of wine can be given complimentary or for a fee. 
(b)  There is hereby created a license for the business of operating a Georgia farm winery tasting room in conformance with the laws of the state and the city. 
(c)  Under this section, the licensee shall be authorized to carry on the business of operating a farm winery tasting room in the licensed premises. For the purposes of this chapter, upon application, a certain location may be designated by the council as a special entertainment district pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. Such designation is made solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
(d)  The farm winery tasting room created by this section is limited to farm wineries licensed by the state and allows the licensee to deal in its farm winery products pursuant to state law. No license is created by this section authorizing any other person to deal in any other alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.8), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-109. - Physical requirements of premises. 
All lounge and restaurant areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. The sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Sales to hotel guests in their hotel rooms; 
(3)  Private clubs; or 
(4)  Special events facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.9), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-110. - Employees of supper club or lounge not to mingle with customers. 
It shall be unlawful for an employee of a supper club or lounge to dance or sit with customers on the premises. It shall be unlawful for any customer to purchase food or drink for an employee of a lounge or supper club on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.10), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-02-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2012, repealed § 6-111, which pertained to live music and dancing and derived from Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.11), adopted Sept. 18, 2007. 
Sec. 6-112. - Purchase of alcoholic beverages by licensee. 
Licensees under this chapter shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of three-fourths (0.750) of a liter or larger, except for single-serve bottles, unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers, in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the next smallest size to such size containers. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.12), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-113. - Package sales prohibited. 
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided hereafter, it shall be unlawful for any distilled spirits and/or malt beverages to be sold by the package from premises licensed for consumption on the premises. Wine and/or growlers may, however, be sold by the package from premises licensed for consumption on the premises, provided that package wine and/or malt beverage licenses are also obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.13), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2012-06-16, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 6-114. - Ancillary wine tasting license. 
(a)  The holder of a wine license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting license to provide samples of wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Wine sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with wine education classes and sampling designed to promote wine appreciation and education. 
(c)  Wine tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a wine counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Wine sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(e)  Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(f)  No open containers of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(g)  Not more than two times per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary wine tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(h)  Holders of an ancillary wine tasting permit shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(i)  Wine sampling and tasting is only permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises. 
(j)  The annual fee for an ancillary wine tasting license shall be set and may be revised by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06-29, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 6-115. - Ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license. 
(a)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, shall be eligible for an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of growler malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Growler malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a growler malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with growler malt beverage education classes and sampling designed to promote growler malt beverage appreciation and education. 
(c)  Growler malt beverage tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Growler malt beverage sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day per customer. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(e)  Only the licensee or an employee shall open, handle, and serve, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(f)  No open growler containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(g)  Not more than two times per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for class participants. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(h)  Holders of an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(i)  Growler malt beverage sampling and tasting is only permitted within the designated interior portion of the premises. 
(j)  The annual fee for an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license shall be set, and may be revised, by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06-15, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 2018-01-01, 1-2-2018) 
Secs. 6-116—6-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS 

Sec. 6-131. - Rent based on sales volume by convicted felons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any rental or lease agreement with a convicted felon whereby the rental paid for a licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business or whereby the convicted felon otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where the primary business of a package licensee is an activity other than the package sale of alcoholic beverages, for example, a grocery store selling package beer and wine. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.1), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2016-12-38 , § I, 12-6-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-12-38 , § I, adopted Dec. 6, 2016, changed the title of § 6-131 from "Rent based on sales volume prohibited; exceptions" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 6-132. - Purchase and sales records. 
(a)  Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by the licensee. All consumption on the premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by them. Such records, more specifically described in subsection (c) of this section, shall at all times be open for inspection by the city manager or his designee. These records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years unless the city manager determines that no such records exist and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensee to require the keeping of such records. 
(b)  If the city manager deems it advisable to conduct an audit of the records of a licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time, and place of the audit. The city manager may designate the city's internal auditor or other person to perform the audit, and the licensee shall cooperate with the audit or be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(c)  At the request of the city manager or his designee, the licensee shall make available the following records required to be kept for at least three years: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine, and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees); 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets; 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports; and 
(5)  Federal income tax returns with all form 1099s. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.3), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-133. - Days when sales unlawful. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law. 
(b)  No retail package licensee shall be permitted to sell package malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits on Sundays except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. No retail consumption on premises licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday unless such licensee is a bona fide eating establishment, caterer, private club, or special events facility as defined in this chapter. Any licensee wishing to sell alcohol on Sunday pursuant to this chapter shall pay the requisite fee for Sunday sales, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.5), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2011-10-17, § 1, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 6-134. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Package licensees shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. Package licensees shall not permit their places of business to be open except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, or between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays, except that where the primary business of a malt beverage package licensee or wine package licensee is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, such restrictive hours shall apply only with respect to the sale of malt beverages or wine. 
(b)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and at any time from 11:55 p.m. on Saturdays until 1:55 a.m. on Sundays. Sunday sales may be made by eating establishments, as defined herein, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, provided application for Sunday sales is made and the fee paid. Sunday sales may be made at any time in private clubs provided application for Sunday sales is made and the fee paid. Further, any licensed eating establishment open on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until midnight may remain open from midnight until 2:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
(c)  The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.6), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2011-10-17, § 2, 10-18-2011; Ord. No. 2018-07-23 , § I, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-135. - Prohibited acts; sexual display on licensed premises. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on the licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace. 
(d)  No licensee shall suffer or permit any person to engage in live conduct exposing to public view the person's genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or buttocks, or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola on the licensed premises. 
(e)  No licensee shall allow any person to engage in sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act prohibited by law, on the licensed premises. 
(f)  Exception. Nothing contained in subsection (d) of this section shall apply to the premises of any theatre, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances, where the performances that are presented are expressing matters of serious literary, artistic, scientific, or political value. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.7), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2009-04-23, § 1, 4-21-2009; Ord. No. 2012-02-04, § 2, 2-7-2012) 
Sec. 6-136. - Delivery and storage. 
(a)  Except as may be otherwise specifically provided herein as to brewpubs, alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises in the original container and in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler) with a permit from the city to make deliveries in the city. Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided herein as to brewpubs, any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.8), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2016-04-07 , § III, 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 6-137. - On-premises consumption unlawful; sale of growlers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any package licensee to open or break the package of any alcoholic beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sale of growlers, as defined in subsection 6-1(b), is authorized for and by those licensees holding a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but not authorized under any circumstances for licensees holding a package distilled spirits license, and who do not sell, or offer for sell [sale], vehicular fuel. The filling of growlers with malt beverage drawn from a tap on a barrel, cask, tank, or keg on the premises shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this chapter, provided that no filled growlers may be consumed on the premises. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. In order to be securely sealed, the growler must be sealed with a tamper-proof cap or seal. With the exception of brewpubs pursuant to subsection (c), growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, in the case of a brewpub holding a license to sell malt beverages by the package, growlers may be filled from barrels, casks, tanks, or kegs of malt beverages manufactured on the licensed premises, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.9), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2012-06-14, 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 2016-04-07 , § IV, 4-5-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-06-14, adopted June 5, 2012, changed the title of § 6-137 from "On-premises consumption unlawful" to "On-premises consumption unlawful; sale of growlers". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 6-138. - Regulation of signs and lighting. 
The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.10), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2009-04-23, § 2, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 6-139. - Condition of premises requirements. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by the chief of police, the fire chief, and other authorized agents of the city and the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.11), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-140. - Change of ownership, profit distribution report required. 
(a)  A licensee shall file with the city manager a written, sworn report of any of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change in any legal relationship between any parties named in the application for the license; 
(2)  Any change in the payment of rent for leased premises or any change in the ownership of the licensed premises; 
(3)  Any loss or damage to goods or premises of the licensee which results in a claim against an insurance policy; 
(4)  Any change for any purpose in division of net or gross sales of the licensed business; and 
(5)  Any change in any material facts contained in the application for the license. 
(b)  Such report shall be filed within five days after the date the change occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.5.12), 9-18-2007) 
Secs. 6-141—6-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-161. - "Handling" not to include bagging and carrying out. 
For the purposes of this division, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store, or similar establishment shall not constitute the handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.6.2), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-162. - Age requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall not employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. For purposes of this subsection, the term grocery stores or supermarkets shall not include convenience stores. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.6.1), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-163. - Pouring permit required. 
(a)  An employee pouring permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Any employee of a consumption on the premises licensee who dispenses, sells, serves, takes orders, mixes beverages, or serves in any managerial position; and 
(2)  Any employee of an alcoholic beverage caterer who is engaged in handling, selling, or serving alcoholic beverages; provided, however, employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy or cook or dishwasher shall be excluded. 
(b)  No licensee shall employ any person required to have a pouring permit until such person has procured such permit. 
(c)  Any person required to obtain a pouring permit shall apply to the city police department for such permit. Only one pouring permit per individual will be issued for employment at any and all establishments within the city. The permit will be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit or renewal shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting, and such other investigation as may be required by the police department. The fee for a pouring permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(d)  Any person required to obtain or renew a pouring permit shall complete and file with the city police department the provided application, which shall include, but not be limited to, name; residence address; date of birth; prior arrest record, if any, which shall be used for investigative purposes only; the name of the employer; and the address of the licensed establishment employment location for which the permit is sought. 
(e)  When a person applies for a pouring permit, the chief of police or his designee shall have a complete and extensive search made to determine if there is a police record of such person. If there is a record of conduct prohibited by this chapter, issuance of a permit shall be denied. 
(f)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued an employee pouring permit if the chief of police receives information which warrants such a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that warrants revocation of the card, the card may be revoked. 
(g)  Should any of the information provided by the individual on the original application, or any renewal, change during the one-year term of an issued pouring permit, including, by way of example only, employer, licensed establishment employment address, or residence address, the individual shall promptly notify the city police department of the change and provide the new information. The city police department shall then issue, at no charge to the individual, a new pouring permit for the remainder of the one-year term. The chief of police or his designee is authorized to conduct a concurrent criminal history check at no charge to the individual. 
(h)  A pouring permit shall not be issued if within a period of five years of the application date, the applicant has been convicted of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any sexual-related crime, or any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes or gambling, except as otherwise provided herein. A pouring permit shall not be issued if within a period of five years of the application date, the applicant has more than one conviction for any misdemeanor criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages including, but not limited to, the illegal possession, sale or use of alcoholic beverages, or more than one conviction for any misdemeanor criminal offense relating to the illegal possession, sale or use of any controlled substance. A pouring permit shall not be issued if the applicant has not been released from any parole or probation prior to the filing of the application. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered. 
(i)  A pouring permit shall not be issued if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or covered up any information requested by the police department in the application process. 
(j)  A pouring permit issued through administrative error may be revoked by the chief of police. 
(k)  The chief of police may revoke an employee's pouring permit and demand its return where the employee violates any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(l)  Any conviction for violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the state's Alcoholic Beverage Code shall result in the automatic suspension of the pouring permit. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose pouring permit has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made to refuse to return the card or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the card. 
(n)  When any employee's pouring permit is denied or revoked, the chief of police shall issue to the applicant or permit holder a letter stating that the person does not meet the requirements of this chapter and the reason for the denial or revocation. Upon written request made by the employee within 30 days of the date of denial or revocation, the chief of police will refer the matter and any evidence the person cares to submit in his behalf to the city manager for consideration. If the person requests consideration by the city manager, the entire record will be sent. The city manager shall consider all matters presented and within 30 days of his receipt of the record, make a decision as to whether the person qualifies for a pouring permit under this chapter. In the event the city manager denies or revokes the permit, he shall provide written notice of the denial or revocation to the applicant or employee, which shall set forth the reason for the denial or revocation. The applicant shall have a right of review of the denial or revocation by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County, Georgia, within 30 days of the denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.6.3), 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 2009-11-56, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 2012-12-39, § 1, 12-18-2012; Ord. No. 2014-04-10 , § 1(2), 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 6-164. - Licensee to report disciplinary action. 
Any licensee who has any disciplinary action taken against him or any of his employees who sell, take orders for, deliver, or handle alcoholic beverages by any governmental authority (municipal, county, state, or federal) shall notify the chief of police and the city manager of such action within five days of such action. The following shall be considered to be disciplinary action: any arrest; the issuance of any citation; any indictment, presentment, or accusation; any conviction, including the acceptance of a plea of nolo contendere; any penalty imposed by any regulatory agency; and any other written charge or reprimand against the licensee or any of his employees. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to citations for traffic offenses. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.6.4), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-165. - Happy-hour discounts; other unlawful practices. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than those customarily charged during the remainder of the day; 
(2)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink; provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brewpub from offering a sampler of no more than four types of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces each; 
(4)  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one alcoholic beverage; 
(5)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(6)  Selling distilled spirits in containers or glasses containing more than 1½ ounces of distilled spirits; 
(7)  Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply with respect to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm, or organization for a set period of time for a valuable consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.7.16), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MANUFACTURERS OF DISTILLED SPIRITS, MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-08-16, § I, adopted Aug. 15, 2017, amended Div. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 6, §§ 6-167—6-173 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2016-06-16 , adopted June 21, 2016. 

Sec. 6-167. - License required to manufacture. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this article and chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-08-16 , § I, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-168. - Manufacturer defined. 
As used herein, a "manufacturer" means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage and: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits, also known as a distiller; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer, excepting, however, brewpub brewers, licensed under section 6-53 of article II of this chapter; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vitner. 
( Ord. No. 2017-08-16 , § I, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-169. - Compliance with state law required. 
The applicant for a manufacturer license shall be subject to and comply with all state laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2017-08-16 , § I, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-170. - Application for a manufacturer license. 
Application for a manufacturer license shall be made in the same manner and subject to the same rules and procedures as an application for any other license authorized under this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2017-08-16 , § I, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-171. - Manufacturer licenses. 
Manufacturer licenses which may be issued under this article shall be specific to the alcoholic beverage to be manufactured: 
(1)  Manufacturer license for distilled spirits; 
(2)  Manufacturer license for malt beverages; 
(3)  Manufacturer license for wine. 
( Ord. No. 2017-08-16 , § I, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-172. - Manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
(a)  Barrel , as used in this section, means 53 gallons. 
(b)  As provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.2, a limited exception to the three-tier system for the distribution and sale of distilled spirits shall include the right to sell up to 500 barrels of distilled spirits per year produced at the distiller's licensed premises to individuals who are on the premises for: (1) consumption on the premises; and (2) consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 2,250 milliliters of distilled spirits per consumer per day. 
(c)  A distiller may sell distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (a) of this section on all days and at all times that sales of distilled spirits by retailers and retail consumption dealers are lawful, including, but not limited to Sundays. 
(d)  A distiller shall not sell any distilled spirits for consumption off the premises pursuant to subsection (a) of this section at a price less than the price at which a person licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package is permitted to sell distilled spirits pursuant to O.C.G.A § 3-4-26(b). 
(e)  Any distiller engaging in sales of distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall remit all sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. 
( Ord. No. 2017-08-16 , § I, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-172.1. - Manufacturer of malt beverages. 
(a)  Barrel , as used in this section, means 31 gallons. 
(b)  As provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.1, a limited exception to the three-tier system for the distribution and sale of malt beverages shall include the right to sell up to 3,000 barrels of malt beverages per year produced at the brewer's licensed premises to individuals who are on the premises for: (1) consumption on the premises; and (2) consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 288 ounces of malt beverage per consumer per day. 
(c)  A brewer may sell malt beverages pursuant to subsection (a) of this section on all days and at all times that sales of malt beverages by retailers are lawful, including, but not limited to Sundays. 
(d)  A brewer engaging in sales of malt beverages pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall remit all sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. 
( Ord. No. 2017-08-16 , § I, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 6-173. - Sale allowed only to wholesalers. 
Distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine manufactured pursuant to a manufacturer license issued hereunder shall be sold only to wholesalers and not directly to retailers or end consumers except as may otherwise be specifically provided hereinabove as allowed by state law. 
( Ord. No. 2017-08-16 , § I, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 7. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS WITHIN CITY SPRINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01-01 , § I, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, enacted provisions designated as Div. 6, §§ 6-181—6-186. Inasmuch as the division and sections so numbered already exist within the Code of Ordinances, said provisions have been redesignated as Div. 7, §§ 6-174—6-179, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-174. - General. 
Except as specifically otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this article are intended to set forth certain exceptions and provisions applicable only to licensees whose establishments are located within City Springs (as hereinafter defined) holding licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Except as specifically set forth in this article, all such licensees remain subject to all other provisions of the city's alcoholic beverage ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01-01 , § I, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02-04 , § I, 2-6-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-24 , § III, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-175. - Definition of City Springs. 
City Springs is defined as the area of the city encompassed by the following: "beginning at the southeast corner of the intersection of Sandy Springs Circle and Johnson Ferry Road and traveling eastward along the southern right-of-way of Johnson Ferry Road to the intersection with Roswell Road, then traveling southward from the intersection of Johnson Ferry Road with Roswell Road along the western right-of-way of Roswell Road to the intersection with the southern right-of way of Mt. Vernon Road, then traveling westward along the southern right-of-way of Mt. Vernon Road to the intersection with the eastern property line of the city owned parking lot, then south along the eastern property line of the city owned parking lot to the intersection with Hilderbrand Drive, then west along the northern right-of-way of Hilderbrand Drive to the intersection with the western right-of-way of Bluestone Road, then traveling northward along the western right-of-way of Bluestone Road to the intersection with the southern right-of-way of Mt. Vernon Road, then travelling westward along the southern right-of-way of Mt. Vernon Road to the intersection with eastern right-of-way of Sandy Springs Circle, then traveling northward along the eastern right-of-way of Sandy Springs Circle to the intersection with Johnson Ferry Road and the point of beginning." City Springs shall not be deemed to include establishments not physically located within the designated City Springs area. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01-01 , § I, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02-04 , § I, 2-6-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-24 , § III, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-176. - Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted within the defined City Springs area. 
(a)  Two drink on-street limit. Any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or alternative container other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than two such alcoholic beverages at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than two such alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises. 
(b)  Size limited to a maximum of 16 ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined City Springs area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(c)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass, or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, parks and squares, rights-of-way, parking lots, whether public or private, or in other public places within the defined City Springs area, except to the extent permitted for a special event pursuant to section 6-185(c). 
(d)  Purchase from licensed premises within City Springs. Alcoholic beverages consumed pursuant to this provision must be purchased from a licensed premise within the defined City Springs area. 
(e)  Consumption limited to the defined City Springs area. No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision may be consumed outside of the defined City Springs area. 
(f)  Consumption limited to lawful hours of operation. No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision shall be consumed except within the authorized hours of sale of the establishment where purchased. 
(g)  Any alcoholic beverages purchased pursuant to this division may be excluded from any outside area within City Springs as may be designated and demarcated by the city in its sole discretion. 
(h)  Each consumption on the premises licensee shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in uniform letters not less than one inch in height in substantially the following form: 
It is a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sandy Springs to take any type alcoholic beverage out of this establishment except in an authorized container not exceeding 16 ounces. Any alcoholic beverage removed from this establishment in an authorized container shall not be removed from the City Springs area unless specifically permitted by state law and Sandy Springs ordinance. 
The aforementioned sign shall be accompanied by a visual representation of the defined City Springs area highlighting the area where alcoholic beverages may be transported and consumed pursuant to this division. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01-01 , § I, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02-04 , § I, 2-6-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-24 , § III, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-177. - Alcohol/food sales ratio. 
A licensed establishment located within the defined City Springs area shall derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01-01 , § I, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02-04 , § I, 2-6-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-24 , § III, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-178. - Special events and city-sanctioned or city-sponsored events. 
(a)  For the purposes of this division, a city-sanctioned or city-sponsored event is one which is conducted or sponsored, in full and or in part, by any department, agency, board or commission of the City of Sandy Springs or as may be specifically approved by the city council. 
(b)  The city council may approve and allow the sale of alcoholic beverages within the defined City Springs area by Sandy Springs licensees holding licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, but whose establishments are not located within the defined City Springs area, upon application made in conjunction with a special event permit application or in conjunction with a city-sanctioned or city-sponsored event. The city council may prescribe such other conditions and stipulations as it may deem appropriate with regard to the approval and the applicant shall comply with all provisions of section 6-183 above. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee may approve and allow invitees of a city-sanctioned or city-sponsored special event at City Springs to bring their own alcoholic beverages into the event for consumption only within areas expressly designated as a condition of the special event permit so long as such alcoholic beverages are transported to and from the event area in a cooler or basket, and may prescribe such other conditions and stipulations as he may deem appropriate with regard to the approval. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is prohibited for any person to bring in their own alcoholic beverage in any business establishment in City Springs without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages, except as provided in section 6-8 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01-01 , § I, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02-04 , § I, 2-6-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-24 , § III, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-179. - No abrogation of other laws. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to abrogate or otherwise impact any state law or local ordinance pertaining to public drunkenness, disorderly conduct, driving with an open container or under the influence of alcohol, or similar laws. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01-01 , § I, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02-04 , § I, 2-6-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-24 , § III, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 6-181. - Sale of drinks containing distilled spirits. 
(a)  Imposed. There is imposed upon the retail sale of drinks containing distilled spirits in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of the drink to the consumer. A record of each sale shall be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. 
(b)  Licensee to collect and remit. Every consumption on the premises licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this section from purchasers of drinks containing distilled spirits. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the revenue division of the city to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(c)  Customer receipts; credit sales. If requested by the purchaser, a consumption on the premises licensee shall give to the purchaser a receipt on which the purchase price and the tax imposed by this section shall be itemized separately. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of the drink to the purchaser. 
(d)  Payment and returns by licensee. 
(1)  Each licensee shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the city not later than the 20th day of the following calendar month. 
(2)  On or before the 20th day of each month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the revenue division of the city by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in such form as the city may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of drinks containing distilled spirits and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. Any amounts collected in excess of three percent of the taxable sales shall be reported and paid to the city. 
(3)  Licensees shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.8.1—7.8.4), 9-18-2007) 
State Law reference— Excise tax on sales of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130 et seq. 
Sec. 6-182. - Wholesale taxes. 
(a)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the 15th day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. Remittances shall be accompanied by completed forms as prescribed or authorized by the revenue division of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.8.5), 9-18-2007) 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; local excise tax on sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.; local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq. 
Sec. 6-183. - Deficiency assessment. 
(a)  If the city has cause to believe that a return or the amount of tax paid to the city by a licensee is not proper, the city may compute and determine the amount due on the basis of any information available. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any month. 
(b)  The amount of a deficiency determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes until paid, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(c)  The city shall give notice of a deficiency determination to the licensee. The notice may be served personally or by mail. Service by mail shall be addressed to the named licensee at the licensed premises, shall be made by certified mail, and is complete when delivered with a receipt signed by the addressee or by the receipt of mailing from the United States Postal Service. 
(d)  Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this chapter, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.8.6), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-184. - Failure to file return. 
(a)  If a licensee fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the tax due for the period or periods for which a return was not filed. Such estimate may be based on any information available to the city. Written notice of the estimate shall be given to the licensee in the manner specified by subsection 6-183(c). 
(b)  If the failure to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this chapter, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the licensee shall be added to the estimate of the amount due in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.8.7), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-185. - Interest. 
Any licensee who fails to pay to the city within the time required any amount required to be paid under this article shall pay in addition to the principal unpaid amount, interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the date the tax payment was last due until payment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.8.8), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-186. - Actions for collection; overpayment. 
(a)  At any time within three years after the delinquency of any amount due under this article, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state, or the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Whenever any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
(c)  If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once and such fact has not yet been determined by the city, the licensee shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim with respect to such overpayment or double payment. Such claim shall be in writing and shall state the specific grounds upon which it is based. The claim shall be audited. If the city approves the claim, the excess amount paid may be credited against any other amounts due from the licensee or refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.8.9), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 6-187. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
(a)  The revenue division of the city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee may promulgate rules and regulations for the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Every licensee engaging in the sale of mixed drinks shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as may be required by the city. 
(d)  The revenue division of the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and facilities of any licensee engaging in the sale of any alcoholic beverage, retail or wholesale, in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if no return is made to ascertain the amount of tax due. 
(e)  In the administration of the provisions of this article, the revenue division of the city may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody any information relating to purchases subject to taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-54, § 3(7.8.10), 9-18-2007) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate of animals, § 1.03(b)(1). 
State Law reference— Animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means "dog control officer" and shall refer to an individual employed by the city manager or designee to perform and execute the provisions of this chapter, and his office shall have the power to issue citations for violation of this chapter. 
Animal control shelter means the facilities operated by the city manager or designee for the confining of dogs, cats, or other animals impounded under the provisions of this chapter. 
Cat means cat, or any domesticated feline, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Commercial guard/security dog means any dog that is purchased, leased, or rented and that is trained to guard, protect, patrol, or defend any commercial property, public or private, upon and within which it is located. 
Current vaccination/license tag means a vaccination/license tag bearing a number that shows the license is valid for a one or three year period. The licensing period runs concurrently with the vaccination period. 
Custodian means any person that has been entrusted with the responsibility and care of a dog, cat, or other animal by its owner. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that according to the records of any appropriate authority: (i) inflicts a severe injury on a human without provocation on public or private property; or (ii) aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. Exception: A dog is not considered potentially dangerous or dangerous if it bites a human: 
(1)  When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
(2)  When its owner is being attacked. 
(3)  Who is a willful trespasser on the property of the owner or who is committing another tort or crime. 
(4)  Who has tormented or abused it or who in the past has been observed or reported to have tormented or abused it. 
Dog means dog, or any domesticated canine, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Domestic animal/fowl means any animal/fowl domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition for the advantage of humans. Pen-raised skunks are categorized as those skunks acceptable by the state and may be kept in the state as pets. 
Exotic animal means any animal of any kind that is not indigenous to the state, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal, but shall include any hybrid animal which is part exotic animal. 
Harborer means any person that has provided sustenance and/or shelter to a dog, cat, or other animal for a period of more than seven days. 
Health department means the city manager, or his authorized representatives, which shall include officers or employees of the Atlanta Humane Society so long as such corporation is under contract with the county. 
Livestock means horses, mules, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, and all other animals used or suitable for either food or labor. 
Nuisance means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render the soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome, or unreasonably offends or impairs the senses of smell, sight, and hearing. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, without provocation, bites a human on public or private property at any time. 
Records means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of the city manager or designee. 
Vaccinate means intramuscular injection, by a veterinarian, of a specified dose of antirabies vaccine to an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. government license number of approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and having been approved by the state department of human resources. Vaccine used for vaccination of dogs, cats, or other animals against rabies shall be refrigerated and kept under proper conditions and shall show no signs of spoilage or otherwise be unfit for producing immunity against rabies. 
Vaccination certificate means a certificate provided by the state department of human resources and issued at the time of vaccination of the dog, cat, or other animal and bearing thereon the signature of the vaccinator; the name, color, breed, age, and sex of the dog, cat, or other animal; the name and address of the owner; the date of expiration of the vaccination; and the spay or neuter status, if known. 
Vaccination/license tag means a metal tag bearing a number which is issued to the animal owner after showing proof of vaccination for the animal and paying, when required, the license fee. This tag is issued on behalf of the city by the city manager or designee and is provided by the state department of human resources. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state; the veterinary license number shall be the same as that recorded by the Georgia Board of Veterinary Examiners. 
Vicious animal means any animal which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, bite, or injure humans or other animals without provocation; or an animal which has on one or more occasion caused physical injury to humans or other animals without provocation, whether on public or private property; An animal is not considered vicious if it attacks, bites, or menaces: 
(1)  When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
(2)  Anyone attacking the owner. 
(3)  Unlawful trespassers on the property of the owner. 
(4)  Any person or animal that has tormented or abused it. 
(5)  If it is defending its young or other animals. 
Wildlife/fowl means any animal/fowl of any kind that is indigenous to the state, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal/fowl, and shall include any hybrid animal/fowl that is part wild animal/fowl. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a violation of this Code and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days or both. Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter as it pertains to a potentially dangerous dog will be fined not less than $150.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $300.00 for a third conviction and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed six months, or both. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter as it pertains to a dangerous dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and will be fined not less than $500.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $750.00 for a third conviction and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed six months or both. 
(d)  If the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog fails to comply with section 10-101 and his dog attacks or bites a human, he shall be guilty of a felony and will be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00 and/or imprisonment for not less than one year nor more than five years. 
(e)  If the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog knowingly and willfully fails to comply with section 10-101 and his dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury to or the death of a human, he shall be guilty of a felony. Conviction under these circumstances will subject the owner to a fine of not less than $5,000.00, nor more than $10,000.00 and/or imprisonment for not less than one year, nor more than ten years. 
(f)  In addition to subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the city manager or designee shall immediately confiscate the dog and place it in quarantine for a period of time as provided by the city manager or designee and thereafter such dog shall be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 2, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-3. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The city manager or designee shall enforce this chapter by means of impoundment and court citations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 5, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-4. - Dog/cat license required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog or cat over four months of age kept, maintained, or harbored within the territorial boundaries of the city to obtain a dog/cat license for such dog or cat. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into the territorial boundaries of the city to obtain a dog or cat license for such dog or cat within 14 days from the date of entry. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 6, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-5. - Vaccination/license tag required. 
(a)  In order to maintain a centrally located record of all vaccinated dogs, cats, or other animals kept, maintained, or harbored in the territorial boundaries of the city, the owner, custodian, or harborer of such dog, cat, or other animal is required to apply to the city manager or designee for a vaccination/license tag. 
(b)  A vaccination/license tag shall be issued upon presentation of a certificate showing that the dog, cat, or other animal for which the tag is issued has been vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by this chapter, provided that the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog or cat in the city designated in section 10-4 also makes payment of a license fee to be set by the city manager. The vaccination/license tag will be available to the public throughout the year and is issued on behalf of the city by the city manager or designee. The tag shall be valid for the same period as the time specified by the vaccination. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog in the areas designated in subsection (a) of this section to affix such vaccination/license tag to a collar worn by the dog at all times, except that the wearing of a vaccination/license tag is not required for show dogs where the wearing of such tag could damage the coat, and except when dogs are boarded in kennels or veterinary clinics, or in an area zoned for agricultural purposes where the owner or custodian of the dog in question is using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his person a valid hunting license. In the latter case, the owner, custodian, or harborer shall have the tag or vaccination certificate in his possession where it may be shown on demand by any duly constituted authority. 
(d)  Should the vaccination/license tag become lost, misplaced, or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or harborer of the dog or cat to obtain a replacement tag at a cost set by the city manager. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination/license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove a vaccination/license tag from any animal without the consent of the owner or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 7, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Removal of collar or identification unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-71. 
Sec. 10-6. - Special permits; kennels. 
(a)  Each premises where there are four or more dogs over the age of four months kept, maintained or harbored for a period of 14 days or longer, shall be deemed to constitute a kennel. The owner or person in possession of the premises where the kennel is located shall be required to apply to the city manager or designee for a special permit. Other permits as may be required by the city zoning ordinance, articles 19.3.20 and 19.4.24 relating to kennels, must also be obtained before the operation of a kennel. 
(b)  Applications for special permits shall only be accepted by the city manager or designee if they are complete and compliant. The applicant shall submit as part of the special permit application the following items: 
(1)  Completed application form with the required number of copies for each checklist item as prescribed by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  Documentation indicating the breed, age, gender, photograph, and name of each animal being kept on the site. 
(3)  Survey/site plan detailing the location and size of the property and indicating any proposed outdoor housing or enclosure facilities consistent with the regulations of this chapter and the City of Sandy Springs Zoning Ordinance. 
(4)  Copies of the most recent vaccination certifications and registrations for each animal as filed with Fulton County Animal Control. 
(5)  Documentation/letters expressing no objections from abutting property owner(s). 
(6)  Payment for annual fee set by the city manager or designee. 
(c)  The city shall process all complete and accurate special permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of a complete and accurate application and upon remittance of the appropriate fee. Said special permit application shall be approved or denied at the discretion of the city manager or designee. 
(d)  The city manager or designee, at his or her discretion, may issue or reject an application for special permit based upon consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  Zoning, size, and orientation of the property. 
(2)  Method of kenneling. 
(3)  Location and type of proposed outdoor housing or enclosure facilities. 
(4)  Proposed fencing for the property or kenneling area. 
(5)  Breed of dog. 
(6)  History of maintenance or control of animals including, but not limited to, complaints of excessive noise and/or animals roaming unleashed as documented by the City of Sandy Springs or Fulton County Animal Control. Should it be determined that there is a history of compliance issues, the city manager or designee shall have the discretion to hold a public hearing regarding the application for special permit. 
(7)  Applications that are incomplete, contain false material statements or omissions, or that is for a special permit which would violate any standard within this article or any other ordinance of the city. 
(8)  Such other factors as the city manager or designee determines to be relevant to the appropriateness of the permit based upon the content of the application or other matters raised regarding the application. 
(e)  The special permit will be valid for one year from the date of issue, provided it is not revoked during the year for violations of this chapter. Application to renew a special permit must be made at least 14 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(f)  All commercial kennels that are subject to a business license fee shall be exempt from the annual special permit. 
(g)  Revocation of special permit. 
(1)  Violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for terminating the permit granted by the city to the permittee. 
(2)  Should it be determined that a special permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement or omission, the city manager or designee shall revoke said permit and the subject animals shall be removed from the property within ten business days of the permit being revoked. 
(3)  Revocation may also be based upon documented complaints, violations, or such other matters as may evidence that the permit is no longer appropriate for the location. 
(h)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by the issuance or rejection of a special permit or revocation of a special permit that has been issued pursuant to this section may submit an appeal, to be heard by the city council, in writing to the city manager or designee within 30 days of the date of decision. 
The appeal shall be heard by the city council in accordance with the rules and regulations of the city council and as set forth in this Code. The hearing shall take place not more than 90 days after the filing of an appeal with the city manager or designee. 
(2)  Any appeal of, or other legal challenge to, a final decision of the city council regarding a special permit may be appealed by petition for writ of certiorari filed with the Superior Court of Fulton County no later than 30 days from the date of the final decision of the city council in accordance with applicable provisions of Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 8, 2-7-2006; Ord. No. 2011-08-11,§ 1, 8-16-2011) 
State Law reference— The Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-7. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, poison, cruelly treat, maim, tease, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance or medical attention, improperly use, deprive of shade and shelter, or in any manner whatsoever, torture, kill, or abuse any animal. 
(b)  No person shall abandon any animal on any property, public or private, or keep an animal under unsanitary conditions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to transport any dog in an open-bed truck except when safely confined in a portable kennel or safely restrained by a harness or tether. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 9, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Local authority to adopt ordinances for animal protection under the Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-18; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; abandoning dogs, § 4-8-3; cruelty to dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 10-8. - Cruel treatment of animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall willfully place within reach of any domestic animals any substance that is poisonous or harmful to the animal. 
(b)  No person shall willfully and unjustifiably kill or injure any domestic animal other than livestock maintained for food purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 4, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 10-9. - Disposal of deceased animals. 
No person shall place any dead animal upon his premises or upon the premises of any other person or allow any dead animal to remain upon his premises or any dead animal belonging to the person to remain upon the premises of another without disposing of same or causing the animal to be properly removed or disposed of within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 4, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Disposition of dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-3. 
Sec. 10-10. - Removal of canine fecal matter. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring, or having care, charge, control, or custody of any dog not to remove any feces left by that dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street, lot, public park, or other public area or public property. 
(b)  Dog waste shall be immediately removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in a trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit, or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(c)  Each and every violation of this section shall be punishable to the extent provided by in the penalty provisions of chapter 1 of this Code. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons who have the charge, control, or use of a guide dog. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 4, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 10-11. - Running at large. 
(a)  Generally. Within the territorial boundaries of the city, the running at large of dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs is prohibited, with the exception of cats. Owners of wildlife or exotic animals must have the necessary state and/or federal permits on their person when transporting their animals. 
(b)  Dogs. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or harborer of any dog to allow or permit such dog to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog unless such dog is securely under leash, said leash being not more than six feet long, and under the control of a competent person. Dogs must be confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog and shall be restrained by means of a fence or wall or other enclosure, or restrained individually by a leash or chain. Excluded are those dogs participating in or training for obedience trials, field trials, dog shows, tracking work, or law enforcement. Also, the requirements of this subsection shall not apply in any area zoned for agriculture where the owner or person having custody of the dog is at the time in question using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his person a valid hunting license and proof of vaccination. 
(2)  An electronic confinement system shall be considered an acceptable enclosure when the equipment is properly maintained and in continuous working order, and the animal to be contained within wears the appropriate electronic collar when within the system perimeters. 
(3)  In cases where an animal has been deemed dangerous by the court, or has been trained to be a guard dog, an electronic animal confinement system may not be used as either the primary or secondary enclosure. 
(4)  Individuals who contain an animal by means of an electronic animal confinement system and are found to be in violation of this section or have been deemed as restraining a dangerous animal shall thereafter restrain the animal by means of a fence, wall or other enclosure, or such animal shall be restrained individually by a leash or chain. 
(c)  Restraint of domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife and exotic animals. It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian, or harborer of any domestic animal, livestock, wildlife, or exotic animal to allow or permit such animal to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such unless securely under leash, in a carrying case, or restrained by some other means and under the control of a competent person, with the exception of cats. 
(d)  Confinement of domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. Domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs shall be securely confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such by means set forth under the provisions of this chapter, or approved by the city manager or designee and/or as required by state or federal regulations, with the exception of cats. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 10, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-12. - Commercial guard/security dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use, or maintain any guard/security dog to have signs conspicuously posted on the premises where the guard/security dog is located to warn of the presence of the dog. This warning shall consist of a warning sign placed at each entrance and exit to the premises and in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the sign (eye level). If the premises are not enclosed by a wall or fence, a sign shall be placed at every entrance and exit to each structure on the premises in which a guard/security dog is located. Each sign shall measure at least ten inches by 14 inches and shall contain block lettering stating "Warning, Guard Dog on Duty." In addition, for dogs rented or leased, the sign shall set forth the name, address, and phone number of the responsible person or persons, to be notified during any hour of the day or night. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person who keeps, uses, or maintains a guard/security dog to ensure the dog is vaccinated against rabies and licensed as required by section 10-5(b). The dog also must have the current vaccination tag affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times as required by section 10-5(c). 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person that sells, leases, and/or rents any guard/security dog to be used within the city to notify the city manager or designee, of the location and number of guard/security dogs in use, kept, or maintained at a particular location. The city manager or designee shall maintain a record of the location, number of guard/security dogs, and current rabies vaccination and licensure of all guard/security dogs utilized within the city. The person that sells, leases, and/or rents a guard/security dog to be used in the city shall furnish the following information to the city manager or designee: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the location where a guard dog is located. 
(2)  Name, breed, sex, and current license tag information of each guard dog at any location in the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in an open bed truck, and the vehicle transporting guard dogs shall be identified as to the business owner. It shall be unlawful to transport any guard dog in the city except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Each dog shall be placed in separate holding bins. 
(2)  Each holding bin shall be enclosed and measure 48 inches long by 18 inches wide by 30 inches high. 
(3)  Each holding bin will be adequately ventilated. 
(e)  No guard/security dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate objects such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(f)  A guard/security dog shall be confined by the owner/custodian/harborer within a building or secure enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 11, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-13. - Confinement of female dogs in heat. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, custodian, or harborer of any female dog in heat within the areas designated in section 10-4(a), when she is left unattended, to securely confine such dog so as to prevent contact with another dog except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 12, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 10-14. - Skunks and foxes. 
(a)  All skunks, except pen-raised skunks, and all foxes from whatever geographic region, including Alaska and Canada, are forbidden to be purchased, sold, owned, possessed, or harbored. Pen-raised skunks and foxes in possession as of July 1, 1987, are grandfathered. 
(b)  Pen-raised skunks, other than black and white skunks, may be purchased and kept as pets after securing a permit from the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee is responsible for ensuring that purchasers of pen-raised skunks are made knowledgeable of the proper care, handling, and confinement. No pet store shall allow the purchase of pen-raised skunks without being first presented with the permit issued by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 13, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-15. - Wildlife or exotic animal. 
Each owner, custodian, or harborer of any wildlife or exotic animal must obtain all necessary state and/or federal permits and meet all state and/or federal requirements for keeping such an animal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 14, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-16. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Any vicious animal shall be deemed a nuisance. A vicious dog will be exempt as a nuisance upon classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog as prescribed by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animal or livestock except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any housing or enclosure used by any domestic animal or livestock shall be well-drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  A domestic animal or livestock shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner. (Exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors and public or commercial horse facilities.) 

 
(3)  Except in an area zoned for agriculture, each domestic animal or livestock shall be provided with the following average minimum floor or ground area in the enclosure or housing in which it is kept. (Exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors and public and commercial horse facilities.) 

 
(4)  Except in the areas zoned for agriculture, the maximum number of domestic animals or livestock that may be kept on any single premises shall not exceed the following. (Exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors, and public and commercial horse facilities.) 

 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 15, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-17. - Animals as prizes. 
It shall be unlawful to offer as a prize or gift any animal in any contest, raffle, or lottery, or as an enticement for fundraising or for entry into any place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 1, § 16, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-18. - Animals restricted on City Springs Green. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them below: 
(1)  City Springs shall be defined by the same boundaries as section 6-175 of the Sandy Springs Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  City Springs Green shall be defined as that area within City Springs bordered by the sidewalk running along the northern right-of-way of Mount Vernon Highway between Roswell Road and Bluestone Road, the sidewalk running along eastern right-of-way of Bluestone Road between Mount Vernon Highway and Johnson Ferry Road, the sidewalk running along the southern right-of-way of Johnson Ferry Road between Bluestone Road and Roswell Road, and the sidewalk running along the western right-of-way of Roswell Road between Johnson Ferry Road and Mount Vernon Highway. City Springs Green shall include both paved and unpaved areas within the defined area. Except for the sidewalk running along the eastern right-of-way of Bluestone Road, City Springs Green shall not include the sidewalks serving as the boundaries of the defined area. 
(3)  Service animals are defined as dogs that are individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities pursuant to titles II and III of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(b)  No dog or other domesticated or exotic animal/fowl, livestock or other wildlife shall be permitted on the City Springs Green except as part of an event licensed by the city. Service animals shall be exempt from this section. 
(c)  Any person found to have been in violation of this section shall be subject to civil penalties in amounts to be established by resolution of council. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06-17 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Secs. 10-19—10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-51. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  The owner, custodian, or harborer of each dog or cat over four months of age, kept, maintained, or harbored in any area of the city is required to maintain a current rabies vaccination on such dog or cat. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into the city from outside the city to have such dog or cat vaccinated within 14 days from the date of entry, provided that when the owner or person having custody of the dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the city manager or designee that such dog or cat has a current vaccination, as prescribed by this article, such dog or cat will not be required to be vaccinated again until the expiration date of the current vaccination. 
(c)  Only a licensed veterinarian shall be entitled in connection with his practice, on the request of any owner of a dog, cat, or other animal, to vaccinate such dog, cat, or other animal against rabies, with a vaccine as set forth in the definition of "vaccinate" in section 10-1, provided that at the time of vaccination he furnishes two copies of the vaccination certificate to the owner, forwards one copy to the city manager or designee, and maintains one copy for his files. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 2, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Inoculation of canines and felines against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. 
Sec. 10-52. - Rabies cases to be reported. 
It shall be the duty of any person knowing of a rabid animal, or of any animal showing symptoms of rabies, to immediately report such animal to the city manager or designee and give as much pertinent information as possible. Any bite by an animal shall be reported to the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee, in order to maintain an effective epidemiological surveillance and control program, shall maintain a record of its rabies-related activities, including investigation and confirmation of rabies in animals, in the manner and frequency stipulated by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 2, § 2, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Duty of persons to notify, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4. 
Sec. 10-53. - Quarantine. 
(a)  In the event a dog or cat has bitten a human, such animal shall be immediately confined at the animal control shelter, veterinary hospital, or other such premises deemed acceptable by the city manager or designee for a period of ten days from the date of the bite to be observed for symptoms of rabies. 
(b)  In the event a warm-blooded animal other than a dog or cat has bitten a human or other warm-blooded animal, or in the event a warm-blooded animal has been bitten by another warm-blooded animal, the recommendations contained in the Rabies Control Manual compiled by the state department of human resources shall be followed. 
(c)  All expenses incurred for boarding an animal for the quarantine period as well as other applicable fees shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, custodian, or harborer to fail to surrender a dog, cat, or other animal, which has bitten a human, upon the sworn statement of the person bitten. Such animal will be placed under quarantine or submitted for laboratory examination at the discretion of the city manager or designee. The provisions of this division shall apply, regardless of whether or not such animal has a current rabies vaccination and tag. 
(e)  When rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the city manager or designee may designate a geographical area within which quarantine of all owned warm-blooded animals shall be maintained. Such animals shall be immediately confined to the premises designated and in a manner approved by the city manager or designee, whether or not such animals have been vaccinated against rabies. 
(f)  No warm-blooded animal shall be brought into or removed from a quarantined area or premises without written approval of the city manager or designee. 
(g)  Quarantine ordered by the city manager or designee shall be maintained for such period as deemed necessary to protect the public health. 
(h)  Quarantined areas or premises where rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies remain at large may be posted by the city manager or designee with signs which read as follows: "Rabies Suspected" or "Rabies—Keep Away from Animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the city manager or designee and shall not be removed except by the city manager or designee. Such signs shall not be defaced. 
(i)  The owner, custodian, or harborer of each animal subject to a quarantine invoked by the city manager or designee under the terms of this article shall be notified of the quarantine, the particular animals subject thereto, and shall be given such other information as the city manager or designee deems necessary. 
(j)  Every animal showing clinical signs of rabies, as determined by the city manager or designee, shall be immediately destroyed; and/or the heads of all animals suspected of having had rabies at the time of death shall be submitted to the epidemiology office, department of human resources, for examination by the department of human resources laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 2, § 3, 2-7-2006) 
Charter reference— Authority for regulation of animals and fowl, § 1.03(b)((1). 
Secs. 10-54—10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VICIOUS ANIMALS AND DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq. 

Sec. 10-101. - Precautions to be taken by owners. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of any dog or other animal known by such person to be vicious, dangerous, or potentially dangerous shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, or anyone having any such animal in his possession or custody, to ensure that the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is kept under restraint, as prescribed in subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this section, and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, custodian, or harborer, and it is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, locked pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended so that children are prevented from entry and to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from escaping. 
(c)  For owners of a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog whose animal lives out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a locked pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides, a secure top attached to all sides, the sides must be securely set into the ground or onto a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked when the animal is unattended. This enclosure shall provide protection from the elements. 
(d)  A vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall not be upon any street or public place except when securely restrained by leash not more than six feet in length and humanely muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the city manager or designee, and in the charge of a competent person. 
(e)  Whenever outside of its enclosure, as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, but on the owner's property, a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be attended by the owner or custodian and restrained by a secure collar, muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the city manager or designee, and on a leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(f)  No vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied while unattended by the owner or custodian to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its primary enclosure. 
(g)  A warning sign (i.e., beware of dog) shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the premises. These signs are exempt from building permit requirements. 
(h)  Failure to keep any vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog confined or under restraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 3, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 10-102. - Notice to owners of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  When the city manager or designee classifies a dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the city manager or designee shall notify the dog's owner. The notice shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the city manager or designee's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has the right to request a hearing on the city manager or designee's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the city manager or designee; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the city manager or designee's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control hearing board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(b)  When the city manager or designee receives a request for a hearing, as provided in this section, such person shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The city manager or designee will notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and, in addition thereto, the city manager or designee shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the hearing board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the city manager or designee's classification of the dog. 
(c)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the city manager or designee shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(d)  A certificate of registration to the effect that the dog owner has a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall also be issued by the city manager or designee, and is contingent upon the dog owner presenting to the city manager or designee evidence of: 
((1)  An enclosure as prescribed in this chapter for confinement of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog; 
((2)  The proper posting of the premises as prescribed in this chapter; and 
(3)  An insurance policy or surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00, insuring the owner against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by a dangerous dog. This shall apply to dogs classified as dangerous, only. 
(e)  An annual fee of $100.00 will be charged in addition to regular dog licensing fees, to register dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. This registration fee is subject to change as dictated by the city council. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, the city manager or designee shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city manager or designee does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this chapter are maintained by the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration, or following the date of any renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the city manager or designee within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or been sold, stolen or donated. If the dog is sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. If sold or donated to another resident of the city, the new owner has ten days after taking possession of the dog to register the dog with the city manager or designee. If the owner moves with the dog from one jurisdiction to another within the state, the owner shall register the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(h)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog as required in this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 3, § 2, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Registration of dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25; notice to owner of dangerous dog, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
Secs. 10-103—10-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION 

Sec. 10-141. - Impoundment of dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, and exotic animals. 
(a)  Any citizen may pick up and impound any animal running at large in the city, provided said animal is promptly surrendered to the city manager or designee to allow the person having the right of possession an opportunity to reclaim their animal. 
(b)  Dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, and exotic animals within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded: 
(1)  Dogs or cats without a current rabies vaccination. 
(2)  Dogs or cats without a current city license. 
(3)  Dogs not wearing a current vaccination/license tag. This shall include dogs wearing a tag that was not issued for said dog. 
(4)  Warm-blooded animals which have bitten a human or another warm-blooded animal and warm-blooded animals which have been bitten by another warm-blooded animal suspected of having rabies. 
(5)  Warm-blooded animals suspected of having rabies. 
(6)  Unconfined warm-blooded animals in quarantine areas. 
(7)  Animals whose safety, health, or life is in immediate danger. 
(8)  Animals whose ownership is unknown. 
(9)  Dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, or exotic animals roaming at large, with the exception of cats. 
(10)  Vicious animals or dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined in this chapter. 
(11)  Commercial guard/security dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined in this chapter. 
(12)  Dogs in heat not properly confined as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  No animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this article by virtue of a vaccination, tag, or certificate. 
(d)  The city manager or designee empowered to perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding a dog or other animal which the officer is in immediate pursuit of with the exception of any occupied building into which the dog or other animal may enter. In the latter case, if the occupant or owner of the premises gives permission to the city manager or designee to enter the premises, the city manager or designee may remove said dog or other animal. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, interfere with, hinder, resist, obstruct, or molest the city manager or designee in the performance of his duties, or for any person to remove any animal from the city manager or designee's vehicle or animal control shelter without the permission of the city manager or designee. 
(f)  When the owner of the dog or other animal impounded under the provisions of this article can be readily identified and located, the city manager or designee shall notify the owner of the impoundment. A reasonable attempt to contact the owner shall be satisfied by a telephone call to the owner's residence, when possible, or a postcard sent to the owner's residence through the U.S. postal system. 
(g)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately impounded by the city manager or designee if: 
(1)  The owner of the dangerous dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required by this chapter; 
(2)  The dangerous dog is not validly registered as required by this chapter; or 
(3)  The dangerous dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as specified in this chapter. 
Any dangerous dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section, and upon payment of reasonable impoundment costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was impounded, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 4, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Duty of local officers to impound livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-4; confiscation and destruction of dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
Sec. 10-142. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Every animal impounded under the provisions of this article which is found upon arrival at the animal control shelter to be diseased or injured, and whose ownership is unknown or is relinquished in writing, shall, at the discretion of the city manager or designee, be immediately destroyed if not accepted by an organization approved by the city manager or designee, and provided such organization signs a receipt for the animal. In the event an owner cannot be contacted and the severity of the injury or disease of the animal dictates that euthanasia is a humane course of action, the animal will be destroyed and the owner, if known, notified as soon as possible. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, the release of an impounded animal will impair the safety of the public, such animal will be held pending a court order disposition. 
(c)  Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article except livestock shall be held a minimum of three days from the day of impoundment or such longer period of time as deemed reasonable by the city manager or designee. Livestock shall be held a minimum of 14 days. Animals under observation for rabies symptoms shall remain in the animal control shelter for such period of time as the health department or its designee may deem necessary to protect the public health. 
(d)  Impounded animals not claimed within three days of the day of impoundment or at the end of the quarantine period shall be disposed of (euthanized) in a humane manner as approved by the city manager or designee. No animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be released to any person or organization for the purpose of live animal experimentation. 
(e)  Before the release of any impounded animal, the owner shall pay the following: 
(1)  A vaccination fee on any unvaccinated animal when a vaccination is required by this chapter. 
(2)  A license fee for any unlicensed dog or cat in an area covered by this chapter. 
(3)  An impoundment fee. 
(4)  A daily boarding fee. 
(f)  The city manager shall establish reasonable vaccination, license, impoundment, and boarding fees. In some instances the amount of impoundment and boarding fees will be on a cost-incurred basis. 
(g)  Proceeds from license, impoundment, and boarding fees shall be applied to the annual operating budget of the city for animal and rabies control, enforcement activity, and operation of the animal facility. 
(h)  The city manager or designee shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, illness, death, escape, or pilfering of any animal with which it deals but shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 3, § 2, 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Destruction of vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-43; redemption of impounded livestock by owner, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-6; disposal of impounded livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-7. 
Sec. 10-143. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall cooperate with the Atlanta Humane Society and any other approved organization by offering for adoption or placement cats and/or dogs not claimed by the person having the right of possession or any cat and/or dog that may be designated as a stray. 
(b)  Organizations with a continuing interest in adopting animals from the animal control shelter must register with the city manager or designee on the forms provided and be designated as an approved adoption organization. 
(c)  All animals housed at the animal control shelter shall be under the authority of the city manager or designee. No animal will be released for adoption or placement prior to the holding period required by section 10-142(c) and with the written approval of the city manager or designee. 
(d)  The city manager or designee may confer ownership (permit adoption) of any animal which has become the property of the animal control shelter to an approved organization, subject to conditions prescribed by the city manager or designee, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Payment of any vaccination, licensing, or veterinary costs shall be the responsibility of the receiving organization; 
(2)  Evidence satisfactory to the city manager or designee that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other diseases administered; and 
(3)  Evidence satisfactory to the city manager or designee that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(e)  The Atlanta Humane Society will have the right of first refusal on adoptable animals at the animal control shelter. Other approved organizations interested in the adoption of a cat and/or dog may call the animal control shelter on Monday and Thursday morning to question the availability of adoptable animals. The city manager or designee may also contact an approved organization if an animal is available for adoption. No animal shall be held more than 24 hours past the time of notification. 
(f)  The city manager or designee shall be held harmless and free from liability for any animal adopted to or placed with an approved adoption organization. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-09, ch. 5, art. 3, § 3, 2-7-2006) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections generally, § 2.04 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Compliance with state law. 
All elections and challenges thereto shall be in compliance with the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-95, § 1(ch. 3, art. 1, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 14-2. - General elections. 
In accordance with section 2.02 of the Charter, general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-95, § 1(ch. 3, art. 1, § 2), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Time of elections, § 2.02(b); § 6.01(b). 
State Law reference— Time of municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-9. 
Sec. 14-3. - Special elections. 
Special elections shall be held as needed and conducted in accordance with Charter, section 2.03 and the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-95, § 1(ch. 3, art. 1, § 3), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 14-4. - Superintendents. 
The city council shall appoint the municipal superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70.1. The council shall provide for the Superintendent in accordance with and for the purposes set forth in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-71. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-95, § 1(ch. 3, art. 1, § 4), 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 14-5. - Conducting elections. 
The city shall coordinate all elections with the county board of elections and registration. The city may contract or otherwise decide by agreement with the county board of elections and registration for that board to coordinate and conduct all elections in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-95, § 1(ch. 3, art. 1, § 5), 12-19-2006) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities and counties to coordinate elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45. 
Sec. 14-6. - Candidate requirements. 
(a)  Residency. In accordance with section 2.02 of the Charter, candidates for mayor and city council must have been a resident of the city for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of election. Councilmembers must have resided in their particular district for at least six months immediately prior to the date of the election. Councilmembers must continually reside in such district during that person's period of service. The mayor must continually reside in the city during the period of service. 
(b)  Age. All candidates for elected municipal office must be at least 18 years of age at the time of qualification. 
(c)  Registration. All candidates for elected municipal office shall be registered to vote in the city at the time of qualification. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-95, § 1(ch. 3, art. 2, § 1), 12-19-2006) 
Charter reference— Residency requirement, § 2.02. 
State Law reference— Authority for local ordinance reducing age of eligibility for public office, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1. 
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Position of city emergency management director created; duties. 
(a)  There is established the position of city emergency management director. The fire chief or a designee thereof shall act as the city emergency management director. The director shall be charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the city manager on matters pertaining to natural or manmade emergencies or disasters at interagency or interjurisdiction meetings; 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency and disaster operations; 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city departments and agencies, an operational plan for use by the city crisis management team. This plan shall be in consonance with the state and federal emergency operation plans. The plan shall be submitted to the city council and thence to the state or federal agencies for approval as may be necessary; 
(4)  To carry out the day-to-day administration of emergency and crisis preparedness and disaster program which may include the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management agency through the appropriate local emergency management agency; 
(5)  To render reports, such as may be necessary, which document such items as event financial statements, activity reports, incident action plans and event critique as required by the city manager in keeping with good business practices; 
(6)  To coordinate with the appropriate state, federal or mutual aid group in the planning, training and implementation of disaster operations. 
(b)  The city emergency management director shall be attached to the office of the city manager and shall be under the general direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 2.1, 11-8-2006) 
State Law reference— Local emergency management organizations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 18-2. - National incident management system. 
The national incident management system of March 1, 2004, developed by the United States Department of Homeland Security is hereby adopted by reference, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 2.2, 11-8-2006) 
Secs. 18-3—18-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-20—18-33. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FALSE ALARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, adopted July 18, 2017, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 18-34—18-45 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2012-11-35, adopted Nov. 6, 2012. 

Sec. 18-34. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to encourage alarm owners and alarm companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms. The City of Sandy Springs finds that excessive false alarms unduly burden the Sandy Springs police and fire-rescue departments and wastes limited public safety resources. 
(b)  This division governs alarm systems intended to summon a public safety department and requires registration, assessment of fees for excessive false alarms, provides procedures for repeat offenders, provides for the severability of the parts hereof if declared invalid, and provides an effective date. 
(c)  This division does not govern calls made directly to the emergency communications center by residents, businesses or guests of the City of Sandy Springs. The city's emergency resources are always available and will always respond to the direct calls of its citizens and business owners. This division shall apply only to calls made to the emergency call center by contracted third parties not physically present at the alarm site. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Sec. 18-35. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adopted code(s) means the code adopted by the city and, in the absence of an adopted code, the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code 72 (NFPA 72) and the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 101 (NFPA 101). 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the city to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and to administer the provisions of this division. 
Alarm company means any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in the business of planning, installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing and/or monitoring alarm systems in the City of Sandy Springs. An alarm company shall include without limitation any office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the circuits on a continuous basis and where there is a subsequent relaying of such messages by a live voice to the city's emergency communications center. Where an alarm company contracts with another entity to perform services related to an alarm system, alarm company shall mean any entity contracting with the alarm user. Where more than one entity contracts with the alarm user to provide services related to an alarm system, alarm company shall mean the entity approved by the alarm administrator and designated as the responsible party in such alarm system's registration with the city pursuant to section 18-36 of this division. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the city to allow the installation, operation and/or monitoring of an alarm system within the city. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal, whether audible, visual, and/or silent, generated by an alarm system, to which a public safety department is requested to respond. 
Alarm site means a single premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multitenant building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of a fire, illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which a public safety department will be requested to respond, but does not include alarms installed in motor vehicles, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. Alarm system also includes a system or portion of a combination system consisting of components and circuits arranged to monitor and/or exterior annunciate the status of an alarm signal or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the appropriate response to those alarm signals. 
Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to the emergency communications system requesting public safety department dispatch. 
Cancellation means the process by which a response is terminated when the alarm company notifies the emergency communications center that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring public safety department response after an alarm dispatch request. 
City means the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
City council means the governing body of the city consisting of the mayor and members of council. 
Duress alarm means a silent alarm signal which is generated when an alarm user enters a designated code into the alarm system keypad different from the regular arm and disarm code and designed to alert the alarm company that the alarm user is being forced to turn the alarm system off against the user's will. Emergency communications center means the ChatComm Emergency Communications (911) Center or such other call center as may be designated by the city for the intake of alarm company requests for dispatch of public safety department personnel. 
Enforcement official means the fire chief or the police chief, or their respective designated representatives. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system to summon a public safety department that results in: (a) an inspection by a public safety department that indicates no fire, medical emergency, unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed, occurred or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system; or (b) the cancellation of a request to summon a public safety department due to no emergency situation at the alarm site requiring response. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm so long as the alarm company, or designee, is put on notice that the alarm system is being tested and no public safety department response is requested by the alarm company. False fire alarm means a false alarm to summon the fire department. 
Fee means the assessment of a monetary charge payable to the city authorized pursuant to this division, to defray the expenses of responding to a false alarm. 
Fire chief means the fire chief of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
Fire department means the City of Sandy Springs Fire-Rescue Department. 
Fire watch means a person or persons approved by the fire department enforcement official who is assigned to the premises for the purpose of protecting the occupants from fire or similar emergencies. A fire watch may involve at least some special action beyond normal staffing, such as assigning an additional security guard(s) to walk the premises, who has been specially trained in fire prevention and in the use of fire extinguishers, in notifying the fire department, in sounding the fire alarm system located on the premises. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Intrusion alarm means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
KNOX rapid entry system or KNOX system means a secure access program that provides immediate entry for emergency responders into buildings and other secured property. The KNOX system utilizes three devices: KNOX boxes, KNOX key switches and KNOX padlocks. The KNOX box is a small, wall-mounted safe that holds building keys for emergency responders to retrieve for access in emergency situations. A KNOX key switch allows electric override to power operated gates and doors. A KNOX padlock allows access to non-power operated gates and doors. 
Medical alarm means a wireless pendant or transmitter that can be activated by the user in an emergency to transmit a signal to an alarm company to summon emergency medical personnel. 
Monitored system means an alarm system which is monitored by a remote monitoring facility which receives signals from the alarm system and notifies emergency response forces. 
Owner means any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or manage the premises. 
Panic alarm means an audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued. 
Police chief means the chief of police of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
Police department means the City of Sandy Springs Police Department. 
Premises means any building, structure or combination of buildings, and structures which serve as dwelling units such as single-family, multi-family or any other area within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any purpose, wherein an alarm system is installed. 
Private guard responder means a private guard company, an alarm company's guard, an alarm user, or a person or entity appointed by an alarm user to be responsible to confirm that an attempted or actual crime, fire or other emergency has occurred at an alarm site. 
Public safety department(s) means the Sandy Springs Police Department and the Sandy Springs Fire Department individually or collectively, as the context indicates. 
Qualified alarm technician means any person who inspects, installs, repairs or performs maintenance on alarm systems and has successfully completed training consistent with alarm industry standards. A qualified fire alarm technician shall additionally be: a) factory trained and certified; b) National Institute of Certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET) Fire Alarm Level II certified; or c) licensed or certified by a state or local authority. 
SIA control panel standard CP-01 means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for alarm system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 control panel standard features for false alarm reduction." 
Verify means: 
(1)  Visual or audible confirmation of an attempted or actual crime, fire or other emergency situation at the alarm site, or where an alarm is not monitored by visual surveillance, an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting public safety department dispatch. For the purpose of this division, telephone verification shall require at a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify himself/herself to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting public safety department dispatch. If neither attempt successfully reaches the alarm site or an alarm user who can properly identify himself/herself and determine whether an alarm signal is valid, then the alarm shall be considered verified for the purposes of this division. The provisions of this subsection (1) shall sunset at 11:59 p.m. on June 18, 2019. 
(2)  Effective June 19, 2019, verify or verified means visual or audible confirmation of an attempted or actual crime, fire or other emergency situation at the alarm site by means of: 
a.  Confirmation by the alarm user at the alarm site or via self-monitored audio/visual equipment; 
b.  Confirmation by a private guard responder at the alarm site; 
c.  Audible and/or visual evidence provided by a monitored alarm system, provided that such audible or visual evidence shall be made available to the emergency communications center prior to dispatch of the city's public safety department(s). 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05-15 , § I, 5-15-2018; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Sec. 18-36. - Alarm permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No alarm system shall be used in the city unless the alarm company first obtains a permit for such alarm system from the city. Each alarm system shall be assigned a unique number, and the alarm company shall provide the alarm permit number to the emergency communications center to facilitate public safety department dispatch. An alarm company shall notify each contracting alarm user in writing upon the registration of the alarm user's alarm system and provide each alarm user with the permit number for their respective alarm system. Additionally, alarm companies must copy the city on each notification to an alarm user that is required under this subsection (a). 
(b)  Registration. Each alarm company has the duty to obtain and complete an alarm permit registration application on a form provided by the city in accordance with adopted codes. The registration form shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name(s), address of the premises, mailing address (if different from the address of the premises), business, cellular and home telephone number of the owner, lessee, operator, manager or person in possession of the premises wherein the alarm system is installed; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of a minimum of two persons who can be notified in the event of the activation of the alarm system, who shall be capable of responding to the premises within 30 minutes, and who are authorized to enter the premises to ascertain the status thereof; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the alarm company which has contracted to service and/or monitor the alarm system and a valid permit number issued by the city pursuant to section 18-39(b) of this division. Alarm companies not registered with the alarm administrator but attempting an alarm system permit registration shall not be issued an alarm permit number; 
(4)  The date the registration is signed or the alarm system is placed in operation for any reason; 
(5)  The type of alarm system being registered, including whether the system is monitored through video surveillance; 
(6)  The name, address, nature of relationship and services of all other entities providing services to the alarm site in connection with the alarm system, including without limitation contracted monitoring services; and 
(7)  Any other documentation that is required by adopted codes. 
(c)  Non-transferability; new registration required. Alarm permits are not transferable. Upon transfer of the possession of premises at which an alarm system is maintained, the alarm company shall register for an alarm permit for any new alarm user before putting the alarm into operation. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. When information required on the alarm permit registration application changes, the alarm company shall provide correct information to the city within one day of the change. If an alarm company becomes noncompliant with the requirements of this division, including without limitation changes in information or any failure to pay fines pursuant to section 18-41(e), such permit may be suspended until the alarm company comes into compliance. Upon the suspension of an alarm company's permit for noncompliance with any provision of this chapter, an alarm company shall no longer be registered with the city and shall not be entitled to request public safety department response to the activated intrusion alarms of its contracting alarm users. Further, such suspended alarm company shall be responsible for notifying each of its contracting alarm users within the city in writing via U.S. certified mail that the alarm company's permit has been suspended and that the alarm company is no longer entitled to request public safety department response to the activated intrusion alarms of its contracting alarm users. Such notification shall be made within seven days of suspension and shall include the alarm administrator on the distribution list. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate alarm permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(f)  Failure to register. All alarms and alarm companies in the city are required to be registered with the city and issued a permit number, and alarm companies must provide a valid permit number for each alarm when requesting police or fire dispatch in response to said alarm. Failure to provide a valid permit number for an alarm shall be a violation of this division subject to enforcement by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05-13 , § I, 5-1-2018; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-36 , § I, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 18-37. - Duties of the alarm user/owner. 
An alarm user or owner shall be required to: 
(1)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; 
(2)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes upon notification of the need to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide right of entry to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises; 
(3)  Ensure that an alarm system is not manually activated by the alarm user or any other person for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; 
(4)  KNOX rapid entry system: 
a.  All new and existing commercial occupancies having an automatic fire alarm system shall have an approved KNOX system installed in a location approved by the fire department. 
b.  The KNOX system box shall contain all keys, fobs, reader cards, etc. for all locked areas of the building as required by the fire department. "Keys" shall include but not be limited to, all areas of the building, automatic fire alarm systems, pull station resetting tools, all elevators and elevator machine rooms, sprinkler systems riser rooms, and gated areas with keypad access, including the front gate and any interior gate/areas, including pools and common areas. "Keys" shall not include keys to individual multifamily rental units. 
c.  All commercial properties within the city with power operated vehicle or pedestrian access gates shall have an approved KNOX key switch system for access by public safety personnel. All commercial properties with non-power operated vehicle or pedestrian access gates shall be equipped with a KNOX padlock. 
d.  All building owners and managers shall notify the fire department immediately of changes of locks and/or keys, fobs, reader cards, etc., for building access to allow for the placement of new keys in the KNOX system box. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Sec. 18-38. - Fire alarm system certification. 
All newly installed or recertified commercial fire alarm systems shall be approved by the fire department enforcement official. The certification shall indicate that the fire alarm system is in compliance with adopted codes. The certification shall be signed by a qualified fire alarm technician. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Sec. 18-39. - Duties of an alarm company. 
An alarm company shall be required to: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain required state and local license(s) and/or permits; 
(2)  Register with the alarm administrator its name, address, contact phone number, name and address of its registered agent in Georgia, and a statement certified by the alarm company acknowledging venue and jurisdiction in Georgia state court and Sandy Springs municipal court for violations under this division. Failure to provide all of the required information shall result in denial of registration. Alarm companies not registered with the alarm administrator attempting alarm permit registration pursuant to section 18-36(a) shall not be issued an alarm permit number. 
(3)  Reporting updated information. When any information required for alarm company registration under this section 18-39 changes, the alarm company shall provide correct information to the alarm administrator within one day of the change. If changes in information cause an alarm company to become noncompliant with the registration requirements herein, such registration may be revoked or deemed invalid by the city until such time as the alarm company comes into compliance. 
(4)  Register with the alarm administrator any alarm system prior to the alarm system being put into operation; 
(5)  Provide the owner with notice of the existence of this division, a copy of the alarm system operation instructions in accordance with adopted codes, and the manufacturer's instructions. 
(6)  Maintain current contact information, including alarm user permit numbers. At the time of filing an alarm report with the city to facilitate dispatch, all alarm companies shall provide the emergency communications center with the name of the alarm company's representative requesting police or fire dispatch, a valid permit number for the alarm company and for the alarm user, and a telephone number for contacting the alarm company representatives and obtaining the information required under subsection (g) of this section 18-39, or its successor. 
(7)  Alarm companies that request police or fire response to alarm signals shall maintain a record of all calls to the emergency communications center stating the date and time of the call, location of the alarm and the name, address and phone number of the alarm user. The records shall indicate the name and number of any person called in an attempt to verify an intrusion alarm, the time such calls were placed, and shall indicate the cause of the alarm, if known. This record shall be current and shall be made available to the emergency communications center at the time emergency dispatch is requested and to the city's designated representative at any time during normal business hours; 
(8)  Alarm companies shall use control panels meeting SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 on all new installations; 
(9)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide verbal and written instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user and provide written information on how to obtain service from the alarm company; 
(10)  An alarm company performing monitoring services for an intrusion alarm system shall verify that an intrusion alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Any intrusion alarm not verified by the alarm company prior to requesting dispatch will not be eligible for response by the police department. 
(11)  All newly installed or recertified commercial alarm systems shall be approved by the alarm administrator. The certification shall indicate that the alarm system is in compliance with adopted codes. The certification shall be signed by a qualified alarm technician; 
(12)  An alarm company shall communicate a cancellation to the emergency communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
(13)  It is the responsibility of the alarm company and its technician to prevent false alarms during installation, system repairs, or system service. Proper notification shall be made to the alarm company that the system is in a test mode to avoid dispatching public safety departments in response. 
(14)  Upon registration with the city, alarm companies must provide the alarm administrator a listing of each alarm site in the city using an alarm system furnished and/or monitored by said alarm company. Alarm companies are responsible for supplying the alarm administrator with any changes of its list of alarm users within 14 days of such change. Failure to timely notify the alarm administrator of additions, deletions or changes to the alarm company's list of alarm users shall be a violation of this division and subject to penalties established by resolution of council. 
(15)  In the event that an alarm site is suspended pursuant to section 18-41(c) of this division, the alarm company is responsible for notifying the alarm user in writing via U.S. certified mail of the occurrence, duration, cause and effect of the suspension within seven days of the beginning of the suspension. The alarm company shall copy the alarm administrator on all notifications required under this subsection (15). 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-36 , § II, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 18-40. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning a public safety department when no fire, medical emergency, burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic voice dialer that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the emergency communications center or the police department. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or use an alarm system or device that emits or produces real or simulated smoke, fog, vapor or any like substance that obscures vision. Use of this device shall result in no emergency response. 
(e)  Alarm companies shall not install a device for activating a panic or holdup alarm that has a single action, non-recessed button. Any panic or holdup alarm that utilizes a single action, non-recessed activation button existing at the time of this division shall have up to September 1, 2022 to conform to the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Sec. 18-41. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms to summon police department. 
(1)  It is hereby found and determined that any false alarm to summon the police department is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance and shall be unlawful. Civil penalties for each false alarm to summon the police department within any 12-month period may be assessed against an alarm company in amounts established by resolution of city council. 
(2)  Activation of an intrusion alarm which is determined to be false but which is verified by an alarm company shall be deemed falsely verified and shall result in a violation of this division by the alarm company. 
(3)  Only those locations registered with the city and serviced by a registered alarm company will be eligible to receive police services in response to an activated intrusion alarm. Audible alarms from unregistered locations are subject to violation of the city noise ordinance. 
(b)  Excessive false alarms to summon the fire department. 
(1)  It is hereby found and determined that any false alarm to summon the fire department is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance and shall be unlawful. Civil penalties for each false alarm to summon the fire department within any 12-month period may be assessed against an alarm company in amounts established by resolution of city council. 
(c)  Public safety departments will not respond to an activated intrusion alarm system at an alarm site following the third false alarm (registered or unregistered) within any 12-month period. Such suspension of alarm response shall be for a period of one calendar year following the date the determination is made to suspend public safety department response to an alarm site pursuant to this subsection (c), provided there is no transfer of ownership of the alarm site. Suspension of public safety department response to an alarm site pursuant to this subsection (c) may be appealed pursuant to section 18-44 of this division. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the police or fire chief or their respective designee may at their discretion identify those critical or high risk locations not subject to automatic suspension for false alarms when such suspension would be detrimental to the safety of the public. 
(d)  Other civil penalties. Violations of other provisions of this division shall be enforced through the assessment of civil penalty(ies) in amounts established by resolution of city council. 
(e)  Payment of civil penalties. Civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice from the city. 
(f)  Except for alarms at a wholesale or retail firearms business, intrusion alarm response shall be dispatched by the police department only after an attempted or actual crime has been verified by the alarm company, alarm user or private guard responder, pursuant to this division. This subsection (f) shall not apply to fire, medical, holdup, duress or panic alarm response. 
(g)  Noncriminal (civil) violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be civil in nature and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction. 
(h)  Fire watch. The fire department enforcement official has the authority to order a fire watch in accordance with adopted codes, due to repetitive false fire alarms, until corrective action is taken, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet all requirements or pay the fees provided for in this division within 15 days after notice is mailed; 
(2)  Occurrence of a third false fire alarm at a premises pursuant to section 18-41(c) of this division; or 
(3)  The failure of a person notified pursuant to section 18-37(c) of this division to appear within 30 minutes of notification occurs four or more times within a 24-month period. 
(i)  Notice to disconnect or deactivate fire alarm system. Written notices to disconnect or deactivate a fire alarm system where applicable law does not require an alarm be operative shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the alarm user and alarm company, and shall specify the date on which the alarm company shall be required to disconnect or deactivate the fire alarm system. This date shall be at least 15 days after the notice is mailed to the alarm user and the alarm company. The alarm user and/or alarm company may appeal the order of the fire department enforcement official pursuant to section 18-44. 
(1)  Each building affected because the alarm signal from the fire alarm system has been disconnected or deactivated shall be required to establish a fire watch until the fire alarm system has been returned to service. The fire watch shall meet the requirements set forth by the fire department. Duties of the fire watch may include notifying the fire department and building occupants of an emergency, preventing a fire from occurring, or extinguishing small fires. 
(2)  The owner is responsible for paying all costs associated with establishing a fire watch. 
(j)  The fire department enforcement official shall have the authority to direct the owner or the alarm company to silence an activated fire alarm system, and have the alarm company take corrective action taken and thereafter reset it. 
(k)  Any false information provided to the alarm administrator or the emergency communications center by any alarm user, alarm company or private guard responder is a violation of this Code, and may be subject to additional civil or criminal penalties under state law. 
(l)  Apartment building alarm systems. If an alarm system installed, or caused to be installed, to service any tenant in an apartment building is monitored by an alarm company, the alarm company shall provide to the alarm administrator the name of a representative of the apartment building owner or property manager who can grant access to the rental unit by police or fire department officials responding to an alarm dispatch. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05-15 , § II, 5-15-2018; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018; Ord. No. 2018-12-36 , § III, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 18-42. - Reconnection of fire alarm systems. 
(a)  A fire alarm system may be reactivated upon a finding by the fire department enforcement official that the alarm user and/or the alarm company have taken corrective action to remedy the cause of the false fire alarms at the premises. 
(b)  The fire department enforcement official shall have the right to inspect the fire alarm system and test it prior to approving a new order to reconnect or reactivate the alarm system. 
(c)  The fire department enforcement official shall not approve a new order to reconnect or reactivate a fire alarm system if the alarm company has failed to pay any fee pursuant to this division. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Sec. 18-43. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-44. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this division may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the police chief or the fire chief, as applicable, within 30 days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions. The written notice of appeal shall contain the cause for the appeal and any other pertinent information relevant to the case. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decisions. The police chief and fire chief shall each respectively designate a hearing officer from the police department and the fire department to hear appeals related to their agency. The respective hearing officer shall render a decision within five business days and give written notification of his/her decision. The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to the respective chief by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of receipt of the hearing officer's decision. The respective chief shall have the final decision in this matter. The hearing officer's decision and the decision of the respective chief are subject to review by the courts having jurisdiction by proceedings in the nature of writ of certiorari. 
(b)  Appeal standard. The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
(c)  Appeal of order to disconnect or deactivate. An alarm user or alarm company to whom a notice to disconnect or deactivate a fire alarm system was mailed pursuant to section 18-41(i) shall be entitled to appeal the order to the fire department hearing officer. An appeal must be in writing, stating the reasons why the order to disconnect or deactivate should be withdrawn. The appeals shall be made within 15 days after notice to disconnect is mailed to the owner. The fire department hearing officer or his designee shall review the facts and circumstances and shall determine whether the owner has shown good cause why the order should be withdrawn. If the hearing officer affirms the order to disconnect or deactivate a fire alarm system, the owner shall have 15 days after the written decision is mailed to the owner to comply with the order. The appeal of an order to disconnect or deactivate shall suspend the effective date of the order until the appeal has been acted upon by the hearing officer. 
(d)  Responsibility for fees/costs. In the event the appeal is not upheld, the owner or alarm company shall also be responsible for any fee assessed to reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the hearing officer in enforcing this division. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05-15 , § III, 5-15-2018; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Sec. 18-45. - Confidentiality, immunity and severability. 
(a)  Confidentiality. To the extent allowed by law, information contained and gathered through the alarm system registration process will be held in confidence by the city. 
(b)  Governmental immunity. Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either express or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damages resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm system registration, the alarm company and alarm user acknowledges that the police department and fire department response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of responding units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(c)  Severability. The provisions of this division are severable. If a court determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision. 
( Ord. No. 2017-07-15 , § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06-18 , § I, 6-19-2018) 
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire prevention powers, § 1.03(b)(10). 
State Law reference— Fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Fire department created. 
There is created a fire department for the city. The department shall be composed of a fire chief and any fire officers or other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the city manager, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the fire chief. The fire department may provide any and all services as allowed by state law. The city manager shall appoint the fire chief and fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.1, 11-8-2006) 
Charter reference— Fire department authorized, § 1.03(b)(25). 
State Law reference— Local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq. 
Secs. 22-2—22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE AND FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-23. - Application of building and fire related codes to existing buildings. 
(a)  The Uniform Act for the application of building- and fire-related codes to existing buildings (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.), and all subsequent amendments thereto, is adopted and incorporated by reference and shall be controlling in the corporate limits of the city. A copy will be on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
(b)  Any other provisions of the city Code which does not adopt state law by reference and which is more restrictive than the rules of the state safety fire commissioner shall be controlling over the rules of the state safety fire commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.12, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-24. - Enforcement. 
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by personnel in the city fire department. The fire chief may assign members of the fire department as inspectors. If necessary, these inspectors may be reassigned to the firefighting force at the discretion of the fire chief. The provisions of the fire prevention code may also be enforced by the code enforcement officials of the city operating under the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.2, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-25. - Collection of fees. 
The fire department shall have the authority to collect fees for reimbursement of review and inspection services in an amount set by the council per resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.13, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-26. - Fire prevention code and state standards adopted. 
(a)  Fire prevention code—Adopted; amended. 
(1)  The city hereby adopts the International Fire Code, referenced in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B), as adopted and amended from time to time by the department of community affairs, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the alteration and repair of existing buildings and other similar work in the city, and the same is incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. A current copy of said code shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk, where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(2)  The following revisions are hereby made: 
a.  Section 101.1: Replace the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" with the phrase "the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia." 
b.  Section 109.3: Replace the phrase "[specify offense]" with the phrase "violation of the City Code." Replace the phrase "[amount]" with the phrase "five hundred dollars ($500.00)." Replace the phrase "[number of days]" with the phrase "90 days." 
c.  Section 111.4: Replace the first instance of the phrase "[amount]" with the phrase "one hundred dollars ($100.00)." Replace the second instance of the phrase "[amount]" with the phrase "five hundred dollars ($500.00)." 
d.  The geographic limits, referred to in subsections 1., 2., 3., and 4. of this subsection, of the International Fire Code, shall be as follows: 
1.  Section 3204.3.1.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): All zoning districts other than M-1 and M-2, except as may be approved by the city fire code official as otherwise conforming to the requirements of this Code. 
2.  Section 3404.2.9.5.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of class I and class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): All zoning districts other than M-1 and M-2, except as may be approved by the city fire code official as otherwise conforming to the requirements of this Code. 
3.  Section 3406.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of class I and class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited): All zoning districts other than M-1 and M-2, except as may be approved by the city fire code official as otherwise conforming to the requirements of this Code. 
4.  Section 3804.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas): All zoning districts other than M-1 and M-2, except as may be approved by the city fire code official as otherwise conforming to the requirements of this Code. 
(b)  Same—New materials, processes or occupancies. 
(1)  The city manager and the chief of the fire department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those enumerated in said code. 
(2)  The chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in such chief's office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(c)  State minimum safety standards and state accessibility code for buildings and facilities. In addition to the International Fire Code, the city also hereby adopts the state minimum fire safety standards and the state accessibility code for buildings and facilities (Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner Rules and Regulations chapter 120-3-20) as issued by the safety fire commissioner. In addition to those buildings and structures regulated by the state minimum fire safety standards, such standards shall also apply to all existing and proposed buildings, including warehouses, manufacturing plants and all retail and department stores regardless of size; however, specifically excluding all structures excepted in said state minimum fire safety standards as amended from time to time. (See O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4) 
(d)  Conflict of application. In the event the provisions of the state minimum fire safety standards, International Fire Code, or the building code of the city conflict or differ in application, those provisions which are deemed by the chief of the fire department as the strictest shall take precedence and be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.3, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-27. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an action of the fire chief or other city official or employee of the city fire department, including, but not limited to, disapproval of an application, refusal to grant a permit, regarding a determination that the International Fire Code or city ordinances do not apply or have been misconstrued, but excluding those actions or violations which are within the purview of the state fire marshal, or as otherwise required by law, may appeal and be heard by the city board of appeals in accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth by this Code, and said board. 
(b)  All appeals, pursuant to this section, must be filed in writing with the city community development department within 30 days from the date of the decision or action from which the aggrieved party appeals. All appeals must be filed on forms which can be obtained at the city community development department. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by an action of the city board of appeals may appeal within 30 days to the superior court of the county by writ of certiorari or as otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.4, 11-8-2006; Ord. No. 2009-02-04, § 1, 2-3-2009; Ord. No. 2009-03-12, § II, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 22-28. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statements, specifications, plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken within the time affixed herein may be prosecuted for violations by the city after the person has been issued a citation by a duly authorized officer of the fire department of the city or an authorized law enforcement officer of the police department of the city. 
(1)  Upon conviction, the person shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within 30 days. Each day's continuing violation shall be treated as a separate offense. 
(2)  In addition to all other provisions of this section, any violation of this chapter is deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application of injunction in the superior court of the county or any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.5, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-29. - Authority at fires. 
(a)  The fire chief or fire officers under his direction shall have full control over all fire apparatus of the fire department in service at any fire. It shall be the duty of the fire chief or his designee to: 
(1)  Superintend the fire department while performing any public duty in fighting a fire. 
(2)  Give general and specific directions as to the manner of fighting fires, the use of hose and apparatus, and the specific duties and assignments of the various members of the fire department in attendance at a fire. 
(b)  The fire chief may immediately suspend any member of the fire department for insubordination at any fire. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the city police department in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.6, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-30. - Obstruction of or tampering with fire hydrants and apparatus prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Place ashes, cinders, dirt, rubbish, vegetation, building material or any other material around or in close proximity to any fire hydrant so as to cause hindrance or delay in access thereto, or prevent the free use thereof by the fire department. 
(2)  Interfere with or tamper with any fire hydrant or attempt to take water therefrom without special authority from the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  Without the consent of the fire chief, no person not an active member of the fire department shall: 
(1)  At any time ride upon any of the fire apparatus of the fire department. 
(2)  Make use of any fire apparatus, hose, or other equipment of the fire department, other than for the purpose for which the equipment was intended, without the consent of the fire chief. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-10, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.7, 11-8-2006) 
State Law reference— Damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 22-31. - Interfering with firefighting activities. 
No person, except an active member of the fire department, shall at any time enter within the territory or vicinity of any fire, when the area is roped off or access is denied by the city police, or interfere with or attempt to operate any of the apparatus or equipment of the fire department or any fire hydrant, or interfere by giving orders to any individual, unless requested to do so by the fire chief or fire officers under his direction; provided, however, that the mayor or any member of the council, any police officer or other law enforcement officer, the owner or occupant of the property, and the city manager or any other person as may be specifically authorized by the fire chief or his designate may enter the restricted areas. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.8, 11-8-2006) 
State Law reference— Obstructing or hindering firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; refusal to obey firefighter, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-30. 
Sec. 22-32. - Open burning. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning in any area of the city except as follows: 
(1)  Open burning in a reasonable fashion for the purpose of cooking food for immediate human consumption; provided, however, it shall be unlawful to use charcoal burners or other open flame cooking devices on combustible balconies or within ten feet of combustible construction of a multifamily residential structure as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  Fires set for the purpose of training firefighting personnel of the city's fire department, or for the purpose of teaching fire safety techniques to industrial fire brigades or civilians who reside or work within the city, provided that such training is being conducted by city personnel. 
(3)  Operation of devices using open flames such as candles, lanterns, tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used. 
(4)  Warming fires in a barrel of 55-gallon capacity or less, or other commercially sold outdoor fireplace devices, provided that: 
a.  The fire does not produce dense smoke or obnoxious odors; and 
b.  The fire is attended by an individual over the age of 17 years. 
Untreated wood or lumber shall be the only material or substance allowed in the warming fire. 
(b)  Standards. Allowable open burning as set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Materials such as heavy oils, gasoline, asphaltic materials, plastic, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any other material producing dense smoke and/or obnoxious odors shall not be used for starting or maintaining an open fire. 
(2)  All burning shall be located on private property so as not to interfere with any traffic on public streets or sidewalks. 
(3)  No burning shall be allowed in violation of restrictions imposed by the Environmental Protection Agency or the state environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.9, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-33. - Posting of address. 
(a)  All owners and occupants of improved real property lying within the city are required to post the address of such real property owned or occupied by them with the street address assigned to such property by the city, in such manner that said address is clearly visible and legible from the street on which the improvement on such property fronts. The obligation hereby imposed shall be the joint duty of all owners and occupants of improved real property lying within the city who are over 18 years of age. 
(b)  All owners of apartment complexes lying within the city are required to post the building identified for each apartment building within the complex, whether the identifier is a number or letter or a combination thereof, in such manner that said building identifier is clearly visible and legible from the street or private drive on which each building fronts. The identifier for each building within apartment complexes lying within the city will be a minimum of one foot in height, will contrast with the building itself so as to be highly visible, will be reflective so as to be seen easily in darkness and will not be obstructed at any time by natural or manmade objects. All owners of apartment complexes lying within the city will have a grace period of six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived to come into compliance. 
(c)  All persons who violate this section shall be subject to a fine of $25.00 for the first offense, $100.00 for the second offense, and $200.00 for each subsequent offense thereafter. If the person does not remedy the violation, every 30 days shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.10, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-34. - Sprinkler protection requirements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved system, commercial, means a sprinkler system used for areas less than 5,000 square feet; for light hazard areas (i.e., offices and shipping areas of commercial buildings less than 5,000 square feet), a modified sprinkler system may be used. This system may be used upon appeal to the fire marshal's office by the owner of the building. 
Approved system, commercial/residential, means a sprinkler system designed in accordance with National Fire Protection Association standards and referenced publications, for commercial buildings over 5,000 square feet, or residential structures, or those structures required to be sprinkled by some other code. 
Commercial means a business involved in the exchange of services, productions, or property of any kind; the buying, selling and exchange of articles. 
Multifamily residential structures means a structure containing three or more dwelling units and not classified as a townhome under the International Residential Code. 
New means any additions to existing buildings, whether vertically or horizontally, or any existing building or structure which shall be deemed to be a new building in the event such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation due to a fire or other hazard of serious consequence. For purposes of this definition, the term "substantial renovation" shall mean any construction project involving egress or internal features of such building or structure costing more than 50 percent the building's or structure's gross assessed value according to county tax records at the time of such renovation. For the purposes of this section, the 50 percent gross assessed value standard shall be calculated for each individual building or structure being renovated, and not the gross assessed value of a multi-building development which is contained in a single tax parcel. Any requirements of this section triggered by substantial renovation under this definition shall apply solely to the individual building or structure being renovated. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any requirements of this section triggered by substantial renovation to an individual building or structure contained within a larger multi-building development on a single tax parcel, when such renovation costs more than 50 percent of the gross assessed value of the entire multi-building development, shall apply to the entire multi-building development. 
(b)  Protection system required; exceptions. All new commercial buildings in excess of 5,000 square feet or with an occupant load greater than 100 persons shall be protected throughout with an approved automatic fire protection system, except as follows: 
(1)  For buildings less than 15,000 square feet constructed mainly for the storage of products with limited life loss potential some flexibility may be allowed. The owner may petition to the fire marshal for exception to sprinklers in the storage areas. The fire marshal will give consideration to such things as building construction, products stored, arrangement of storage, number of employees in the area, access to the building, and any other fire protection features provided. This exception will not be allowed for additions to existing sprinkled buildings. 
(2)  For buildings storing materials that are water reactive or may be damaged by water fighting a fire, than by a fire, the fire marshal's office shall use the same considerations. 
(3)  Additions to existing unprotected buildings where the addition totals less than 1,000 square feet; provided, however, the addition must be separated by a two-hour fire barrier in accordance with the city building code and is not required to be protected by some other applicable code. 
(4)  All new multifamily residential structures shall be protected throughout with an approved automatic fire protection system in accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standards as adopted by the office of the insurance and safety fire commissioner. 
(5)  All new one-family and two-family dwellings with a fire separation distance of less than 20 feet from another dwelling structure, or closer than ten feet to the property line, must be sprinkled with an approved automatic fire protection system in accordance with NFPA 13D as adopted by the office of the insurance and safety fire commissioner in the kitchen and fuel fired equipment rooms. 
(6)  There shall be early fire detection systems in all sections of multifamily occupancies as required by the International Property Maintenance Code. All new multifamily structures shall include a hardwired early fire detection system. Existing buildings may have an approved battery operated smoke detector. The fire marshal may require a hard-wire detection system if battery operated detectors are not maintained according to manufacturer's recommendation. 
(7)  The owner is responsible for the inspection and testing of the sprinkler system in accordance with the rules of the state safety fire commissioner on all structures required to have sprinkler systems pursuant to this Code. 
If this section in any way conflicts with the provisions in the International Building Code, the fire prevention code, or the life safety code, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 1.11, 11-8-2006; Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § II, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-35. - Maintenance and reporting of records for fire and life safety systems. 
(a)  Records of all fire and life safety system inspections, tests and required maintenance conducted at the prescribed intervals in the current governing fire codes (O.C.G.A. § 120-3-3, International Fire Code and National Fire Protection Association standards) shall be maintained on the premises of the commercial facility, complex or building premises for a minimum of three years from the date of the inspection for the following fire and life safety systems: 
(1)  Automatic fire sprinkler system(s). 
(2)  Fire alarm system(s). 
(3)  Commercial hood cleaning. 
(4)  Commercial hood suppression system(s). 
(5)  Standpipe system(s). 
(6)  Smoke control system(s). 
(7)  Private hydrant system(s). 
(8)  Fire pump(s). 
(9)  Spray paint booth(es). 
(10)  Emergency generator(s). 
(11)  Clean agent suppression system(s). 
(b)  Records, inspection reports and a code compliance certificate prepared by city approved third-party certified building inspectors shall be maintained on the commercial facility, complex or building premises for a minimum of three years from the date of the inspection. 
(c)  Copies of all records, inspection reports and code compliance certificates shall be provided to the city through a third-party inspection reporting system of the city's choosing, at a fee of not more than $20.00 per system, per annum. 
(d)  This requirements and the conditions of this section shall apply to all commercial facilities, complexes or buildings, including without limitation to all multi-family rental housing as identified in division 4 of article II of chapter 22 of the City of Sandy Springs Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2018-12-33 , § I, 12-4-2018) 
Secs. 22-36—22-44. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE LANES 

Sec. 22-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle belonging to a public utility corporation and designated as an emergency vehicle by the department of public safety; a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or a certified private vehicle belonging to a volunteer firefighter or a firefighting association, partnership, or corporation; an ambulance; or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, or local law enforcement agency, provided such vehicle is in use as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use it for that purpose. 
Enforcement officers means any duly authorized law enforcement officer employed by the city. 
Fire lanes means areas designated by the fire official, or those properly designated as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, providing access for fire department vehicles to buildings, fire department connections and fire hydrants. This includes all alleys, driveways or lanes, devoted to public use, where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with the ingress or egress of fire department vehicles for the protection of persons and properties including, but not limited to, shopping centers, theaters, hospitals, bowling lanes, churches, multifamily housing, and high-rise buildings. 
Fire official means the fire officer or other designated authority, or their duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code. 
Master plats means all original plats drawn in accordance with this chapter; all copies distributed shall be from this original drawing. 
New buildings means any commercial structure or public facility the certificate of occupancy of which was issued after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived. 
Plats means maps created by the building owner and approved by the fire marshal which depict the location and boundaries of land and all existing fire lanes in accordance with this chapter. Such maps shall be drawn to scale. 
Property owners means the person, firm, corporation, or entity possessing any estate, or leasehold right in the property being designated as fire lanes. 
Ticket means an order issued out of court by an enforcement officer of the city directing a violator of this chapter to comply with all civil fines as set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.2, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-46. - Purpose and scope. 
It is the declared purpose of this division to provide for the designation and identification of the fire lanes for the manner, method and language for the posting of signs, to establish the penalty for violation of this chapter, to identify and designate the persons who have authority to enforce the chapter and the limits of such authority; to prohibit parking in fire lanes, to provide for the method of submitting properties to this chapter, to repeal all ordinances in conflict herewith, and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.1, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-47. - Identification. 
(a)  Every existing building and all new buildings shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of designated fire lanes with an all-weather driving surface of not less than 20 feet of unobstructed width. There shall be a minimum roadway outside the turning radius at the curb of 40 feet. There shall be a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet by six inches. Any dead-end fire department access roadway in excess of 150 feet in length shall include a turnaround at the closed end conforming to county construction standards and specifications, latest edition. The minimum hard surface sub-base paving specification shall be at 1½ inches of asphalted topping on at least six inches of bound crushed stone, or the equivalent, capable of supporting the gross vehicle weight of fire apparatus. During construction, when combustibles are brought onto the site in such quantities as deemed hazardous by the fire official, access roads and a suitable temporary supply of water acceptable to the fire department shall be provided and maintained. 
(1)  Where fire protection systems approved by the fire official are provided, the clearances required in this subsection (a) may be modified by the fire official. 
(2)  The fire official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access widths where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations. 
(3)  The creation, deletion, or modification of a fire lane shall be done in the best professional judgment of the fire official. 
(b)  Any owner of a building aggrieved by the decision of the fire official under this section may appeal from the decision of the fire official to the city manager within 30 days from the date of the fire official's decision. All appeals to the city manager shall be in writing setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The city manager shall issue a written decision to the owner within 30 days from the receipt of the written appeal from the owner. 
(c)  The areas designated as fire lanes shall have signs posted meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Signs to read "No Parking Fire Lane." 
(2)  Letters shall not be less than two inches in height. 
(3)  One sign shall be posted at the beginning of the fire lane and one at the end of the fire lane; each sign shall be erected not more than 50 feet apart. 
(4)  Signs posted shall not be more than four feet from the edge of the curb and shall be visible from both direction of the driving surface. 
(d)  The fire official may order curbs to be painted yellow or other distinctive colors. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.3, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-48. - Subsequent maintenance. 
All fire lanes shall be approved by the fire official pursuant to these regulations, and thereafter these fire lanes shall be maintained by the property owner. Designated fire lanes or roads deemed necessary for fire department access by the fire official shall be maintained in a passable condition. 
(1)  Private property owners or their representatives shall be responsible for keeping all fire lanes on their property free from obstructions. 
(2)  Public property owners, the city, or their representatives shall be responsible for keeping all fire lanes within the city's jurisdiction free of obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.4, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-49. - Erection of signs. 
(a)  No person or property owner shall place, erect or maintain any sign for control of parking or traffic which includes the words "Fire Lane" unless such location has been designated a fire lane by the fire official, or was properly designated as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(b)  Any failure to meet the applicable requirements specified in section 22-47 shall be subject to a fine of $150.00 for each violation; provided, however, that the fine will be waived if the required specifications are made within 14 days from the date of citation. If that private or public property owner fails or refuses to meet said requirements on his property within such 14 days he shall, on the 15th day after receiving the citation, be subject to the $150.00 fine for each violation and an additional $10.00 fine for each violation for each day that the owner fails to comply with the provisions of this section until the area is properly designated and constructed. Each additional day shall be construed as an additional violation. All fines assessed under this section shall be paid into the treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.5, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-50. - Violations. 
No person shall park any motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, in a fire lane; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle on official business. 
(1)  Enforcement of this section shall be through a civil action in municipal court by the issuance of a ticket which shall be either left with the vehicle or delivered to -the person in possession thereof. For purposes of such civil action, it shall be presumed that the registered owner of said vehicle is in control or possession thereof. 
(2)  Each violation of parking in a fire lane shall be punished by a $50.00 civil fine. 
(3)  The person receiving a ticket for violation of this section may pay the civil fine by return mail to the municipal court of the city or his designated receiver within 48 hours of the issuance of the ticket or may request a hearing within 48 hours to contest the issuance of the ticket. In the event the civil fine is not paid within 48 hours, the municipal court may issue a citation for contempt requiring the offender to show cause why he failed to pay the fine within the time frame allowed by this section. Upon conviction thereof, the municipal court may impose a fine as provided by law. 
(4)  Upon any person to whom a ticket has been issued under this section, a uniform traffic citation may be obtained with a hearing date thereon from the police officer or uniformed fire inspector whereupon it shall be returnable to the municipal court. Violation of this section shall be enforced through a civil action. The burden of proof shall be on the city. The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence; provided, however, the aforementioned presumption in subsection (1) of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.6, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-51. - Enforcement authority. 
Any duly authorized law enforcement officer employed by the city, code enforcement officer employed by the city, or uniformed fire inspector shall have the authority for enforcement of fire lanes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.7, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-52. - Emergency authority. 
In addition to all powers authorized by state law, as amended, in the event of any fire, explosion, bomb threat, or similar emergency, the fire department in the city shall be authorized to prevent the blocking of any public or private street, road or alley, way or driveway, or emergency lane, during any such emergency or remove any vehicles or obstructions necessary. The officers, members, agents or employees of the fire department of the city shall not be liable at law for any act or acts done while actually fighting a fire or performing duties at the scene of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.8, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-53. - Maintenance and clearing; enforcement liability. 
The city assumes no liability for any damages, injuries, or deaths resulting from enforcement or lack of enforcement of the laws pertaining to maintenance and clearing of the fire lanes. The city has the authority to issue individual tickets or citations for fire lane violations, but the property owner has the ultimate responsibility to clear the fire lanes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.9, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-54. - Enforceability of properly placed signs. 
The disregard or disobedience of the instruction of any sign placed in accordance with the provisions of this division by the driver of a vehicle shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of law, without requiring proof by whom and by what authority such sign has been erected. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.10, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-55. - Application of chapter to properties petition. 
Properties may become subject to this chapter by submitting a petition from the property owner or fully authorized agent of the property owner requesting this chapter to apply. The petition shall be submitted to the fire official and, upon approval, the property shall become subject to this chapter and its subsequent revisions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.11, 11-8-2006) 
Sec. 22-56. - Descriptions for fire official. 
Property which falls within the jurisdiction of the city shall have all fire delineations visually depicted on a plat. These plats shall be designed by the owner and submitted to the city fire department and copies shall be maintained with the city clerk. Each visual depiction shall identify all building exterior walls, traffic and parking lanes, and sidewalks. The areas to be designated as fire lanes shall be delineated in red ink. The plat shall state a scale of measurement and shall be on paper or a series of pages of 8½ inches by 11 inches. The plat identification shall specify the name of the property, a brief legal description of the property, and the length and width of the fire lanes, as approved by the fire official, with whom all master plats will be filed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-86, § 3.12, 11-8-2006) 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § III, adopted Dec. 6, 2016, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 22-57—22-60 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2014-08-28, adopted Aug. 19, 2014. 

Sec. 22-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
AWWA Standard means the current edition of American Water Works Association (AWWA) M17 titled "Installation, Field Testing and Maintenance of Fire Hydrants, as the same may be modified from time to time. 
Certified private fire hydrant contractor means a contractor qualified to perform testing, inspection or maintenance of private fire hydrants pursuant to this chapter, who possesses a current State of Georgia issued plumbers license, utility contractor's license or a fire protection sprinkler contractor license. Contractors performing such certification testing, inspection or maintenance shall adhere to the provisions of the current editions of National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 24: "Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and their Appurtenances" and American Water Works Association (AWWA) M17: "Installation, Field Testing and Maintenance of Fire Hydrants." 
Code means the Code of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
Emergency impairment means a condition where a private fire hydrant is out of service due to an unexpected occurrence, whereby the fire hydrant fails, or may fail, to provide an adequate water supply. 
Fire department means the fire department of the City of Sandy Springs. 
Impaired fire hydrant means a private fire hydrant which is not operational due to an emergency impairment or a pre-planned impairment. 
Impairment means a shutdown of or damage to a private fire hydrant which renders the fire hydrant non-operational and therefore out of service. 
Inspection means an examination of a private fire hydrant to verify that it appears to be in operating condition and is free from physical damage. 
Maintenance means work performed to keep a private fire hydrant operable or to make repairs. 
NFPA Standard means Publication 25 of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) titled Standard for the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems 2012, and any subsequent editions, amendments or revisions thereto. 
Owner means the person that holds record title to the property upon which a private fire hydrant is located. 
Owner's designee means the occupant, management firm, or managing individual designated by the owner who, through specific provisions in the lease, written use agreement or covenants, has assumed responsibility to maintain and repair a private fire hydrant located on the owner's property. 
Person means any individual, partnership, institution, public or private corporation, or other entity. 
Preplanned impairment means a condition where a private fire hydrant is out of service due to maintenance or repair work that has been planned in advance. 
Private fire hydrant means a valved connection to a water main or water supply system for the purpose of supplying water to a fire hose or fire protection apparatus, which fire hydrant is owned by a non-governmental entity and located on private property, including any residential private street where there is ownership of the street by an individual, group of individuals, or a legal entity. 
Record means written documentation of the inspection, testing, maintenance, correction, or repair of a private hydrant. 
Testing means a procedure of periodic physical and operational checks used to determine whether a private fire hydrant is capable of being operated as intended and will perform as intended, e.g., water flow tests. These tests shall be performed at intervals specified in this division. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § III, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-58. - General requirements. 
(a)  Responsibility. Responsibility for properly inspecting and maintaining a private fire hydrant shall be that of the owner or the owner's designee, who shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall be subject to its enforcement in the event of a failure to so comply. 
(b)  Time of inspection. All private fire hydrants shall be inspected and field tested annually by a certified private fire hydrant contractor who shall certify in writing to the fire department: 
(1)  The person's name and the date the inspection was performed; 
(2)  The location of the private fire hydrant; 
(3)  The repairs, if any, performed; 
(4)  The service condition of the private fire hydrant. 
(c)  Testing. All testing of a private fire hydrant shall be conducted by a certified private fire hydrant contractor in accordance with the NFPA and AWWA Standards, and shall also comply with Code section 103-93, water system and fire hydrants. 
(d)  Repair. The owner or the owner's designee shall repair within 30 days a private fire hydrant which fails inspection, is impaired or otherwise does not function as required by the NFPA Standard or the manufacturer's specifications. After completing any repairs, the owner or the owner's designee shall have the fire hydrant inspected by a certified private fire hydrant contractor to certify its serviceability. 
(e)  Impairment device. An impairment device as approved by the fire department shall be placed on any fire hydrant which has been damaged or turned off for repairs or is out of service for any reason. The fire department shall immediately be notified of: (i) the fire hydrant being taken out of service; (ii) the completion of repairs; and (iii) the fire hydrant being placed back in service. 
(f)  Locations. The GPS location of all private fire hydrants shall be provided to the fire department. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § III, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-59. - Records. 
(a)  Contents. The owner or the owner's designee shall maintain a permanent record that indicates the procedure performed to inspect, test, and repair a private fire hydrant. The records shall include the name of the individual who performed the work, test results, the date work was performed, and other pertinent information as the fire department may reasonably require. 
(b)  Records retention. All inspection records shall be maintained by the owner or the owner's designee for a period of four years from the date of the inspection. All inspection records shall be provided to the city within ten business days from the date a request is made by the city in writing to the owner or the owner's designee. Failure to provide such records shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § III, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-60. - Enforcement of violations and penalties. 
Failure to comply with this division shall be a violation and is subject to those penalties contained herein and in section 1-10 of the Code. Each week that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § III, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 22-61—22-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MULTIFAMILY RENTAL HOUSING 

Sec. 22-71. - Purpose. 
This division shall apply to all "multifamily rental housing", unless otherwise noted. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § IV, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire extinguisher shall mean a fire extinguisher classified as a 2A10BC extinguisher or larger with at least five pounds of extinguishing powder. 
Intumescent paint means a type of fire retardant paint which provides passive fire protection to a building by slowing down the progress of a fire and protecting the underlying structures. 
Multifamily rental dwelling means any structure containing three or more separate multifamily rental units used as a residence or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to, multiple-family apartment units, boardinghouses, rooming houses, group homes, and flats. 
Multifamily rental housing means any multifamily rental unit and/or any multifamily rental dwelling. 
Multifamily rental unit means any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one tenant, group of tenants, or family under one lease, or under terms of joint and severable liability. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in premises. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § IV, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-73. - Fire suppression system. 
(a)  All vent hoods, or open areas located above a stove or cooking range, shall be equipped with an NSF certified automatic fire suppression device. Such device shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times by the owner or owner's designee. This section shall not apply to any multifamily rental unit that is equipped with an operable sprinkler head as part of a sprinkler protection system. 
(b)  Any existing multifamily rental housing at the time of this division shall have up to two years to conform to the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § IV, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-74. - Fire extinguishers. 
(a)  A fire extinguisher is required to be located within each multifamily rental unit not equipped with an operable sprinkler head as part of a sprinkler protection system. In addition, fire extinguishers must be located in all common hallways and breezeways on each floor of all structures within a multifamily rental dwelling. The owner is required to maintain all fire extinguishers in good working condition, and compliant with all applicable laws and standards, including a current service tag from a licensed fire extinguisher contractor indicating the fire extinguisher has been serviced within the past 365 days. 
(b)  Any existing multifamily rental housing at the time of this division shall have up to one year to conform to the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § IV, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-75. - Intumescent paint. 
(a)  All areas of any multifamily rental housing without a sprinkler protection system, where there is interior exposed and unprotected wood, studs or plywood, including any attic area not otherwise protected by a dry sprinkler system, must be painted with intumescent paint. 
(b)  Intumescent paint requires a one-time application to all applicable untreated interior exposed and unprotected wood, studs or plywood. Thereafter, intumescent paint shall be applied and maintained where there is a surface breach of the paint. 
(c)  Any existing multifamily rental housing at the time of this division shall have up to the earlier of seven years from the date of this division or two years from the transfer of ownership to conform to the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § IV, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-76. - Fire safety education. 
The fire department shall make available to owners a fire safety pamphlet describing safety information of user benefit to tenants of multifamily units. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § IV, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 22-77. - Enforcement. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this division shall result in a citation and a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each offense. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § IV, 12-6-2016) 
Chapter 26 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Treasure hunts. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Treasure hunt means advertising campaigns conducted for the purpose of promoting the sale of any merchandise, commodity or service of any business or profession conducted for private or corporate gain, whereby some article, thing or token is hidden within the corporate limits of the city and clues as to the locations of such article, thing or token are given by any form of advertising, either by newspaper, radio or television or in any other manner, but shall not include private social parties involving no element or commerce or gain. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or aid and abet in the conducting of any treasure hunt as defined in this section within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 5, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
Secs. 26-2—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-08-41, adopted August 19, 2008, amended the former Art. II., §§ 26-21—26-39. For a more detailed analysis of the inclusion, see also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 26-21. - Findings. 
The council of the city is deeply and profoundly concerned about the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by adult establishments. 
(1)  The city is becoming an increasingly attractive place for the location of commercial enterprises and of residences for families, and the council is committed to adopting ordinances designed to protect the quality of life for its constituents. 
(2)  The council desires to establish policies that provide the maximum protection of the general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the residents of the city. 
(3)  The governing authority of each municipal corporation is authorized to enact ordinances which have the effect of restricting the operation of adult bookstores and video stores to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
(4)  The state supreme court, in Chambers d/b/a Neon Cowboy v. Peach County, Georgia, 266 Ga. 318 (1996), held that local governments may adopt ordinances designed to combat the undesirable secondary effects of sexually explicit businesses, and further held that a governing authority seeking to regulate adult establishments must have evidence of a relationship between the proposed regulation and the undesirable secondary effects it seeks to control. 
(5)  The state supreme court further held in the same opinion that in passing its regulation, a local government may rely on the experience of other counties and municipalities to demonstrate such a relationship. 
(6)  The United States Supreme Court, in City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), held that a local government may rely on the experience of other cities in enacting legislation to regulate adult entertainment business. 
(7)  The city council has received extensive evidence of secondary effects that are currently occurring within the city at adult establishments. Such evidence consisting of direct testimony of undercover agents and citizens that detailed in explicit terms that violations of law are occurring within the existing adult establishments located within the city. Further, that at least one uniformed county police officer was observing these violations and failed to act on such blatant violations. The city council has considered the affidavit and guilty plea involving former Fulton County Police Department Captain Mark Lance wherein he pled guilty to extorting protection money from an adult establishment located within the city. The city council has considered the testimony in contrast with studies and precedents offered by the adult entertainment business. 
a.  The city council has considered live testimony from Dr. Bill Holland, former Deputy Director for the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, over the Georgia Crime Information Center ("GCIC") and Dr. Richard Clarke, Director of Planning for the City of Atlanta Police Department, and from Dillon Fries, certified real estate appraiser, former member of the Appraisal Foundation Advisory Council and the Metro Atlanta Relocation Council, and has testified in state and federal courts across the country. The testimony of such witnesses in the weighed opinion of the city council is that the studies proffered by the adult entertainment industry are not credible on balance given the presence of the undesirable effects which are currently existing including alcohol abuse, fights, sex for hire, prostitution, diminished property values and deterioration of neighborhoods. Moreover, based on the evidence presented on balance, it appears that the lack of police reports at adult establishments are a result of the county's failure to enforce such laws. Moreover, the city council notes the study prepared by the county in the early 1990s coincided with the time period Captain Lance was providing police protection for an adult establishment, therefore, condemning the validity of such studies. 
b.  The city council has further received direct testimony involving adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult novelty stores wherein one such establishment used glory holes and booths and considered direct testimony from an undercover former law enforcement officer that illegal activities occurred at one of the adult establishments. 
(8)  Based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties including, but not limited to, Tucson, Arizona; Garden Grove, California; Ellicottville, New York; New York, New York; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Dallas, Texas; Houston, Texas; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and Gwinnett County, Georgia, which are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city, the city council notes the documented negative economic, physical, and social impact adult entertainment businesses have on the community. 
(9)  Among the undesirable community conditions identified with live nude entertainment at which alcohol is served or consumed are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for the allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior, and acceleration of community blight. 
(10)  The council further finds it has an important governmental interest in reducing crime and protecting surrounding properties from adverse impacts, which interest is unrelated to the suppression of speech. 
(11)  It is the intent of the city council to enact an ordinance, narrowly tailored, sufficient to combat the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses, including the serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment facilities. 
(12)  The city council desires to regulate the adult entertainment businesses within the city limits. Notwithstanding, this article is not to be construed as an endorsement from the city of these establishments. The city council understands that adult entertainment businesses are actually protected under the free speech clause of the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States for their role in communicating "erotic speech." The courts allow communities to regulate speech, not based on the content of the speech, but in time, place, and manner in which it is presented. 
(13)  It is the intent of this article to regulate the time, place, and manner of the operation of businesses or facilities that offer adult entertainment as defined in section 26-22. It is well established and has been the experience of other communities in the state and throughout the United States that adult entertainment, which includes public nudity, has been associated with and may encourage disorderly conduct, prostitution and sexual assault. This section advances the substantial government interest in promoting and protecting public health, safety, and general welfare, maintaining law and order and prohibiting public nudity. The section is narrowly constructed to protect the First Amendment rights of citizens of the city while furthering the substantial governmental interest of combating the secondary effects of public nudity and adult entertainment from areas and uses of the community that are incompatible. Areas and uses that are to be protected from adult entertainment include, but are not limited to, residential, churches, day care centers, libraries, recreational facilities, and schools. 
(14)  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, the city council takes note of the patent conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the similar communities within our country. 
(15)  The city council further finds that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol consumption or sale, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, fighting, battery, assaults, drug use and drug trafficking. Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); 5634 East Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd, 2008 WL 4276370 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curiam). See also California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981). 
(16)  Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol consumption or sale, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this article. The city council finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions are occurring, and will continue to occur in the city. 
(17)  The city council further finds that other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, and adult theaters have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
(18)  The city council further finds that the negative secondary effects of adult establishments upon the city are similar whether the adult establishment features live nude dancing or sells books/videotapes depicting sexual activities. H & A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); High Five Investments, LLC v. Floyd County, No. 4:06-CV-0190-HLM (N.D. Ga. Mar. 14, 2008). 
(19)  Therefore, the city council finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult establishments by restricting hours of operation, prohibiting alcohol sale or consumption, and restricting the distance from other adult establishments and restricting the distance from residential areas, schools, public parks, churches, and children's day care facilities. 
(20)  The city council finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult establishment. 
(21)  The city council finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable activities impacting adversely the community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, the city council directed the city attorney to prepare this article. 
(22)  The city council hereby re-adopts and incorporates these pre-enactment findings and evidence into the adoption of the following code amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means a commercial establishment or facility in the city that maintains 25 percent or more of its floor area for the display, sale, and/or rental of the following items (aisles and walkways used to access these items shall be included in "floor area" maintained for the display, sale, and/or rental of the items): 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, CDs, DVDs or other video reproductions, or slides or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, novelties, toys or other paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities as defined herein or otherwise emulate, simulate, or represent "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, on the premises of the establishment. For purposes of this article, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means live conduct characterized by the display of specified anatomical areas. None of the definitions contained in this section shall be construed to permit any act that is in violation of any city, county or state law. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any establishment or facility in Sandy Springs where adult entertainment is regularly sponsored, allowed, presented, sold, or offered to the public. 
Adult establishment means any adult bookstore, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion picture theater, or adult motion picture arcade. 
Adult motion picture arcade means a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon matter displaying specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Church, temple or place of worship means a facility in which persons regularly assemble for religious ceremonies. This shall include, on the same lot, accessory structures and uses such as minister's and caretaker's residences and other uses identified under the provisions for administrative and use permits. 
Day care facility means a use in which shelter, care, and supervision for seven or more persons on a regular basis away from their residence for less than 24 hours a day. A day care facility may provide basic educational instruction. The term shall include nursery school, kindergarten, early learning center, play school, preschool, and group day care home. 
Golf course means a use of land for playing the game of golf. The term shall not include miniature golf but may include a country club and a driving range as an accessory use. 
Hearing officer means an attorney, not otherwise employed by the city, who is licensed to practice law in Georgia, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this article. 
Library means a place set apart to contain books and other literary material for reading, study, or reference, for use by members of a society or the general public. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 30 percent interest in any sole proprietorship, partnership, or member-managed limited liability company controlling, operating, or owning an adult establishment. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by any county, city or federal government or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Premises means the building for which or upon which a license is issued hereunder and the terms "premises" and "building" are further defined as a structure or edifice enclosing a space within its exterior walls, and covered with a roof or outside top covering of a building or connected or attached or joined with or by a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway. Any structure or structures of any nature that share a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway shall be considered a single premises and building for the purposes of this Code. No building may be subdivided for the purpose of creating more than one premises for the purposes of this Code. In addition, the term "premises" shall include the land and real estate as well as its appurtenances, including the entire parcel together with the boundaries thereof, upon which the licensed premises sits as well as the area of land surrounding said premises. 
Recreational court, private means an improved area designed and intended for the playing of a game or event such as basketball or tennis, and which serves a single-family dwelling(s), duplex dwellings and/or multifamily dwellings, or combinations of dwelling types, including such improved areas which are owned and/or controlled by a neighborhood club or similar organization. A basketball goal adjoining a driveway of typical residential driveway dimensions shall not constitute a recreational court. 
Recreational court, public means an improved area designed and intended for the playing of a game or event such as basketball or tennis, and is operated as a business or as a club unless such club is a neighborhood club or similar organization identified under recreational court, private. 
Recreation fields means an outside area designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisuretime activities including, but not limited to, softball, soccer, football, and field hockey. 
Regularly means the consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis. 
School means any educational facility established under the laws of the state (and usually regulated in matters of detail by local authorities), in the various districts, counties, or towns, maintained at the public expense by taxation, and open, usually without charge, to all residents of the city, town or other district or private facility which has students regularly attending classes and which teach subjects commonly taught in these schools of this state. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activities shall include any of the following specified crimes for which less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
(1)  Rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
(2)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, or pandering; 
(3)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
(4)  Any offense related to any sexually-oriented business, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; 
(5)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(6)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, masturbation, or excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(6)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-23. - Location and distance requirements. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located any closer than 50 feet from any establishment authorized and licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises. For the measurement required by this subsection, distance shall be measured from the nearest public entrance of the structure or tenant space of the adult entertainment establishment to the nearest entrance to the public of the structure or tenant space of the establishment authorized and licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Additional location restrictions for adult establishments are as follows: 
(1)  An adult establishment must be located at least 300 feet from the properties listed below: 
a.  The property line of any Suburban A, Suburban B, Suburban C, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4A, R-4, R-5, R-5A, R-6, NUP, CUP, TR, A, A-L, AG-1 zoned property, or property conditioned for residential purposes; and 
b.  The property line of any public park, public recreational fields, public recreational courts, public golf course, public playground, public playing field, government building owned and/or occupied by such government, library, civic center, public or private school, commercial day care facility or church. 
(2)  For the measurements required by subsection 26-23(b)(1), the distance shall be measured in a straight line from the structure or tenant space of the applicable adult establishment to the closest property line of the zoned property or uses outlined in subparts (b)(1)a or (b)(1)b, above. Where property conditioned for residential purposes is part of a mixed use development, the distance shall be measured to the closest boundary of the area shown on the approved site plan as conditioned for residential purposes. Where a use listed in subpart (b)(1)b is located in a structure or tenant space in a multi-tenant development, the distance shall be measured to the structure or tenant space of that use rather than the property line of the overall development, so as to maximize the number of locations available to adult establishments. The zoning and/or use of land in adjacent jurisdictions shall not disqualify any location within the City of Sandy Springs from being available to an adult establishment. 
(c)  No adult establishment shall be located any closer than 400 feet from any other adult establishment. For the measurement required by this subsection, distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest public entrance of the structure or tenant space of the adult establishment to the nearest public entrance of the structure or tenant space of the other adult establishment. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision in the Sandy Springs Code of Ordinances to the contrary, an adult establishment in a location that satisfies the standards in this section 26-23 shall not be deemed noncompliant with this section by virtue of the subsequent establishment of a land use or zoning district specified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009; Ord. No. 2012-02-03, § 1, 2-7-2012) 
Sec. 26-24. - Rules of operation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed stage shall be defined as a raised floor area designed exclusively for use by adult entertainers at least four feet from the seating area of patrons, and on which no patron shall be allowed. 
Full lighted shall mean illumination equal to three and one-half footcandles per square foot. 
(b)  Compliance with rules. Adult establishments, and any person, firm, partnership, or corporation licensed hereunder, shall comply with the following rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the adult establishment and governing conduct on the premises of the establishment: 
(1)  No adult establishment shall operate between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. No adult establishment shall operate between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises of an adult establishment. 
(3)  No adult entertainment shall occur within four feet of any patron or in any location other than on a fixed stage. 
(4)  No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to have any physical contact with any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. 
(5)  The license shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(6)  No licensee or his employees or contractors shall permit any alcoholic beverages to be served or consumed on the premises. 
(7)  All areas of an adult establishment shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present on the premises. 
(8)  All adult entertainment which is licensed or permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(c)  License revocation. Violations of these rules and regulations may result in the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-25. - Adult establishment work permit. 
(a)  No person, including, but not limited to, cashiers, stocking clerks, performers, dancers, adult entertainers, bartenders, barmaids, bouncers, valets, dj's, bar backs, waiters, waitresses, bathroom attendants and musicians, working either as an independent contractor or as an employee at any establishment holding a license hereunder shall begin working at such establishment, either temporarily or permanently, until such person has made application for an adult establishment work permit (hereinafter referred to as "work permit") to the city police department and has been issued an annual work permit or a temporary work permit by the city police department. Upon the filing of a complete application for a work permit, the city police department shall immediately issue a temporary work permit to the applicant if the applicant seeks to work in a licensed adult establishment and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is eligible for an annual work permit. The temporary work permit shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual work permit. Within 30 days of receipt of a completed application, the city police department shall either issue an annual work permit or a written notice of nonclearance. In the event the city police department has not issued a work permit or has not issued a written notice of nonclearance within the 30-day period following receipt of a completed application, the applicant shall be deemed to have been granted an annual work permit hereunder and may begin work at the applicable adult establishment. 
(b)  All persons required to obtain a work permit hereunder, prior to the date of their first work in an adult establishment, shall report to the city police department for purposes of making application for a work permit to work at an adult establishment. The application shall be provided by the city police department and shall be signed by the applicant. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the following: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years; 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant; 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by a governmental agency, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency; 
(4)  The adult establishment work permit application fee; 
(5)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable; and 
(6)  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the city police department. The city police department shall provide fingerprinting service upon the request of the applicant during regular office hours. 
The city police department shall conduct a criminal investigation to the extent allowed by law on any person making application for an adult establishment work permit under this section. 
(c)  Within 30 days of receiving a completed application, the city police department shall issue an annual work permit to an applicant unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age; 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this article for issuance of a work permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(3)  The application fee for an adult establishment work permit required by this article has not been paid; or 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(d)  If the applicant is deemed ineligible to receive a work permit hereunder based on any of the eligibility requirements contained in subsection (c), the city police department shall issue a written notice of nonclearance to the applicant stating that the person is ineligible for such work permit and explaining the reasons therefore. 
(e)  Any annual work permit issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of issue shown on the work permit. The person issued an adult establishment work permit shall make application for renewal at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the work permit in order to continue working at the adult establishment after expiration of the 12-month issue period. Such renewal application shall include the same information as, and be treated the same as, an initial application pursuant to this section 26-25. The city council shall prescribe a reasonable application fee for an annual adult establishment work permit. 
(f)  Any person that has been granted a work permit hereunder shall bring such work permit to the applicable adult establishment and shall make it available to any member of the city police department upon request on the premises of an adult establishment. If the work permit is revoked or suspended, the work permit shall be returned to the city police department upon request. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer, alter, conceal, deface or otherwise destroy the work permit or to refuse to return a work permit to the city police department in the event of suspension, revocation or expiration. 
(g)  If a person, subsequent to the issuance of a work permit hereunder, violates any provision of this article or otherwise becomes ineligible hereunder to receive a work permit, the city police department shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend or revoke the work permit. 
(h)  (1)  When the city police department issues a written notice of nonclearance or a written notice of intent to suspend or revoke a work permit, the city police department shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or permittee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city police department for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the city clerk, a written request for a hearing. 
(2)  If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the city police department's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the 30th day after it is issued, and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (4) below. 
(3)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the city clerk shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city police department's witnesses. The city police department shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the work permit. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the work permit, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to the superior court by writ of certiorari, and the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the work permit, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city police department to immediately withdraw the notice and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. Where applicable, the city police department shall contemporaneously therewith issue the annual work permit to the applicant. 
(4)  If any court action challenging a work permit decision is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within 30 days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any person lawfully working at an adult establishment on the date on which the completed work permit is filed with the city police department. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of any denial, suspension, or revocation of a temporary or annual work permit, the city police department shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional work permit. The provisional work permit shall allow the respondent to continue employment in an adult establishment and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009; Ord. No. 2012-02-03, § 2, 2-7-2012) 
Sec. 26-26. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, an adult establishment as defined in this article without an annual license to do so. 
(b)  The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(c)  No annual license for an adult establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult establishment shall not be eligible to apply at anytime for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, nor shall such adult establishment allow patrons, members, or guests to bring in or otherwise consume alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to operate an adult establishment within the territorial boundaries of the city shall be required to file for a new license each year, with all supporting documentation pursuant to subsection 26-28(b). 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-27. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult establishment shall have one or more designated persons to serve as an on-premises operator. An on-premises operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-28. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult establishment in the city shall make application to the city manager or designee of the city. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall be made in the name of the adult establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult establishment and shall include the names of the operators as defined herein and of the owners as defined herein. If the adult establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $300.00 shall be paid to the city manager or designee to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city manager or designee shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The filing of an application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conducting or carrying on of any new adult establishment. If a completed application and fee is submitted for a pre-existing adult establishment that is in a location in the city where an adult establishment is allowed, and the application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual adult establishment license, the city manager shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. 
(b)  Contents. An application for an adult establishment license shall be considered complete when it contains the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operators and owners in the preceding five years; 
(2)  The current business address or other mailing address of the applicant, the operators and owners; 
(3)  Written proof of age in the form of a driver's license, a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by a governmental agency, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency, for each applicant, operator and owner; 
(4)  A statement of whether the adult establishment seeking a license, in previous operations in this or any other location, has had its license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, and the reason(s) therefor; 
(5)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk of superior court shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(6)  For each applicant, operator, and owner, a statement of whether the person has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center and made available at the city police department, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the permits unit of the city police department; 
(7)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operators, taken by the city police department. The city police department shall provide fingerprinting service upon the request of the applicant(s) or operator(s) during regular office hours; 
(8)  The address of the premises where the adult establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(9)  The identity of the person(s) designated to serve as an on-premises operator who shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours; 
(10)  Each application for an adult establishment license shall be personally verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  The individual, if application is made on behalf of an individual; 
b.  The general partner, if application is made on behalf of a partnership; 
c.  The president of the corporation, if application is made on behalf of a corporation; 
d.  The managing member, if application is made on behalf of a limited liability company; or 
e.  The chief administrative official, if application is made on behalf of any other organization or association. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the city manager or designee and produce proof that the nonrefundable $300.00 application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of a completed application as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operators and the owners. The city manager or designee of the city shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The city manager or designee shall approve or deny any application for an adult establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such properly completed application. In the event the city manager has not granted a license or has not issued a written notice of intent to deny the license within the 30-day period following the date of complete application, the annual adult establishment license shall be deemed to have been granted. The application for an adult establishment license shall be granted unless the city manager or designee finds: 
(1)  The required $300.00 fee has not been paid; 
(2)  The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application or has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of license; 
(3)  The applicant or an operator or owner has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article; 
(4)  The applicant or any of the operators or owners has had an adult establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by the city, the county or any other county, or municipality located in or out of this state within the preceding five years prior to the date of application; 
(5)  An applicant, operator, or owner is less than 18 years of age; 
(6)  The business has failed to identify an operator as defined herein that will be on the premises at all times during which the business is open; or 
(7)  The location of the proposed premises does not comply with any requirement set forth in section 26-23. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009; Ord. No. 2012-02-03, §§ 3, 4, 2-7-2012) 
Sec. 26-29. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult establishment shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult establishment. 
(c)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(d)  Private rooms prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any employee or independent contractor to engage in adult entertainment or to expose any specified anatomical areas in the presence of a patron in any separate area including, but not limited to, any room or booth, within an adult establishment to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier separating entry to such area from any other area of the establishment. 
(e)  Physical layout requirements of booths, rooms, etc. Any adult entertainment business having available for customers, patrons, or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any video or motion picture must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the video store, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room, or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the video store is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room, or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room, or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room, or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-30. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by a person working on the premises of the adult establishment that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that person's work permit shall be imputed to the adult establishment licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, general partner, managing member, or operator of the adult establishment knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, adopted April 21, 2009, amended § 26-30 in its entirety. The former § 26-30 pertained to penalty for violation of section 26-29 and derived from Ord. No. 2008-08-41, adopted Aug. 19, 2008. 
Sec. 26-31. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or injunction thereof in the manner provided by law. The city may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-32. - Inspection of adult establishment. 
The city police department shall have the authority to periodically inspect the portions of adult establishments where patrons are permitted, to determine compliance with all provisions of this article, during those times when the adult establishment is occupied by patrons or is otherwise open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, adopted April 21, 2009, amended § 26-32 in its entirety. The former § 26-32 pertained to conditions of adult establishment and derived from Ord. No. 2008-08-41, adopted Aug. 19, 2008. 
Sec. 26-33. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of section 26-28. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; or 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operators and owners, conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(3)  The city manager or his or her designee shall issue a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke an adult establishment license when the city manager or designee finds there are grounds for the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  When the city manager issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city manager shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the city manager for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the city clerk, a written request for a hearing. 
(2)  If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten days, the city manager's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the 30th day after it is issued, and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (4) below. 
(3)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the city clerk shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the city manager's witnesses. The city manager shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to the superior court by writ of certiorari, and the decision shall not become effective until the 30th day after it is rendered. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the city manager to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the city manager shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(4)  If any court action challenging a licensing decision is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within 30 days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any adult establishment that is lawfully operating as an adult establishment on the date on which the completed license application is filed with the city manager: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of any denial, suspension, or revocation of a temporary license or annual license, the city manager shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the adult establishment and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-34. - Nonrenewability; change of ownership of establishment. 
(a)  All persons, firms, companies, or corporations, including limited liability corporations and professional corporations, licensed to operate adult businesses in the municipal limits of the city previously registered with the county shall be granted an additional 45 days to file a new application for a license to operate said adult establishment with the city following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  All licenses granted after January 1, 2006, and under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year, commencing December 31, 2006. Licensees shall be required to file a new application, with the requisite $300.00 fee, with the city manager or designee on the form provided for a new license for the ensuing year. Such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. For any applications for a new license after January 1, 2006, an application must be filed on or before November 30 of each year. Any applications received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to the annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license application is received after January 1, reasonable investigative and administrative costs will be assessed as may be prescribed from time to time by the city council. 
(c)  All licenses granted under this article shall be for the calendar year, and the full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for any license application filed after July 1 of the license year. 
(d)  Any person applying for a new license issued under this article who shall pay the required fee for an annual license, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to the annual fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(e)  A change of ownership shall require a new license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-35. - Fee. 
The application fee for the adult establishment license shall be $300.00 and shall be paid as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-36. - Compliance with applicable laws by licensee. 
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who holds an adult establishment license must also display the adult establishment license issued hereunder in a conspicuous location. Failure to display the adult establishment license in a conspicuous location may result in a fine of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-37. - Nonconforming adult establishment uses/amortization. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Financial expenditures means the capital outlay made by the applicant to establish the adult establishment, exclusive of the fair market value of the building and property in and on which such use is located and site improvements unrelated to the nonconforming adult establishment, i.e., paving, fencing, etc. 
Nonconforming adult establishment use means an adult establishment use which: 
(1)  Was lawful and valid when established, as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy as provided in article 23, section 23.1 of the city zoning ordinance; and 
(2)  Does not conform to one or more location requirements of this article or is not in a zoning district where a new adult establishment use would be allowed. 
(b)  Any adult establishment that is a nonconforming use shall not be expanded or otherwise altered outside the scope of the nonconformity currently existing. 
(c)  All nonconforming adult establishment uses shall terminate by December 31, 2010, except that a nonconforming adult establishment use may be continued beyond that date for a limited period of time authorized by the city council, provided that: 
(1)  An application has been made by the owner of such establishment to the city council within 120 days after January 1, 2006; 
(2)  The city council finds in connection with such establishment that: 
a.  The applicant had made, prior to the nonconformity, financial expenditures related to the nonconformity; 
b.  The applicant had not recovered 90 percent of the financial expenditures related to the nonconforming; and 
c.  The period for which such establishment may be permitted to continue is the minimum period sufficient for the applicant to recover substantially all of the financial expenditures incurred related to the nonconformity, but not more than five years; 
(3)  In order to secure an extension of time, the written application for such extension must set forth the following information: 
a.  The amount of the financial expenditures for improvements in the existing enterprise through the date of passage and approval of the ordinance from which this article was originally derived; 
b.  The date each improvement was made with proof of expenditure; 
c.  The amount of such financial expenditures that has been or will be realized through the effective date; 
d.  The life expectancy of the existing enterprise, as based on federal depreciation guidelines; and 
e.  The existence or nonexistence of lease obligations, as well as any contingency clauses therein permitting the termination of such lease. 
This information shall be supported by relevant documentary evidence such as financial statements, copies of lease agreements to premises and any equipment, and tax records. Copies of such documentary evidence must be attached to the application for extension. No investment that was not incurred by the date of passage and approval of this article shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, adopted April 21, 2009, amended § 26-37 in its entirety. The former § 26-37 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008. 
Sec. 26-38. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited; exceptions. 
No person, association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation operating or working in an adult establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substance defined by state law upon the premises of the adult establishment. Any adult establishment that had a license granted by the county shall not be subject to this section until January 1, 2006, at which time all adult establishments within the city shall be subject to this provision, including those licensed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 26-39. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine and/or imprisonment, a violation of this article shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-41, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2009-04-25, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Secs. 26-40—26-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ESCORT SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-66. - Intent of article. 
It is the intent of this article to regulate the operation of escort and/or dating services operating in the city consistent with the requirements of the constitution and laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 14), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-67. - Compliance. 
No person shall conduct the business of an escort and/or dating service in the city without first meeting the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-68. - Copy of article. 
Upon request, the city manager or designee shall provide each applicant hereunder with a copy of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-69. - Information concerning employees to be filed with the city manager; background investigation required. 
(a)  All licensees under this article must file with the city manager or designee their home address, home telephone number, and place of employment. Changes thereto shall be filed with the city manager or designee within ten days from the date the change becomes effective. 
(b)  All employees of the licensee must submit to a background investigation not less than 15 days prior to commencing work to allow for the investigation of the employee. The city manager or designee shall provide the release form used to conduct the background investigation. After the release has been signed, the city police department shall investigate the police record of the employee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-70. - Records of clients. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving escort and/or dating services and to provide the name of the employee providing such service. Records shall be kept for a minimum of three years. These records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city manager or designee and the city police department. 
(b)  Failure to maintain records as required in this section is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 4), 12-1-2005) 
Secs. 26-71—26-98. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 26-99. - Required; application; information to be given. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of providing and/or arranging dates, escorts, or partners for persons shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, file an application with the city manager or designee and obtain a license. This application shall be typewritten or legibly handwritten and shall contain the following as appendices: 
(1)  Name, home and business address of the applicant, date of birth, and sex. 
(2)  The applicant and employees must submit to a background investigation. The city manager or designee shall provide the release form used to conduct the background investigation. After the release form has been signed and witnessed, the city police department shall investigate the police record of the employee. The release form must be signed at least 15 days prior to the issuance of a license to allow for the investigation of the applicant, and for the employee, at least 15 days prior to the commencement of work to allow for the investigation of the employee. 
(3)  The applicant must furnish a list of at least three character witnesses by name, address, and telephone number. 
(4)  Applicants shall furnish the name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant (in whatever position) for the last two years, if applicable. 
(5)  Applicants shall provide two recent identical photographs to the city manager or designee. The photographs must have been taken within the past six months and be a good likeness of the applicant. The photographs must be clear with a full front view of the applicant's face. Photographs may be in color or black and white and the size must be two inches by two inches. The photograph must be taken without head covering unless a signed statement is submitted indicating that the head covering is worn daily for religious or medical reasons. Dark glasses may not be worn in the photographs unless a doctor's statement is submitted supporting the wearing of dark glasses for medical reasons. The city manager or designee shall permanently affix one photograph to the permit. 
(b)  The city police department shall be notified within ten days of any change of ownership and/or partners or employees. 
(c)  A corporation, partnership, or other business entity being established for the purpose of engaging in the business, trade or profession of providing and/or arranging dates, escorts, or partners for persons, must also obtain a license. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate escort services, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 26-100. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No occupation tax certificate or license shall be granted pursuant to this article to any person less than 18 years of age or any person who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. 
Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 6), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-101. - Fees. 
License fees and the background investigation fee shall be as established by the city council. No license can be issued by the city manager or designee until the applicant satisfies the qualifications listed in this article and pays all license fees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 7), 12-1-2005) 
Charter reference— Regulatory fee authorized, § 1.03(b)(4). 
State Law reference— Authority to assess regulatory fees for escort services, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 26-102. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
No person less than 18 years of age shall be employed by an escort and/or dating service in any capacity. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 8), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-103. - Notice of denial of license. 
The city manager or designee shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial of the escort and/or dating service license. The notice of denial shall include the grounds for denial. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 9), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-104. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder may be transferred. 
(b)  Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of the city now in force or hereafter adopted. 
(c)  Whenever the city manager or designee determines there is cause to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder, the city manager or designee must give the licensee a ten-day written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the license. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the licensee may present a defense to the suspension or revocation before the city council or such board as the m city council may designate. The ten-day written notice must include the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held. After the hearing, the board may suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder if any of the grounds set forth in this subsection. A license may be suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The licensee is engaged in the escort and/or dating service under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(2)  The licensee is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his duties; 
(3)  The licensee is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(4)  The licensee has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-6-1—16-6-25, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If, after having been granted a license, the licensee is found not to be of good moral character, or pleads guilty or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above offenses, said license shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
(5)  The application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The licensee fails to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article; 
(7)  The licensee fails to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to initial issuance of a license under this article; 
(8)  The licensee refuses to accept a client solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, or sex. License holders shall not refuse to accept a client unless the client is obviously intoxicated or dangerous; 
(9)  The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; or 
(10)  Any other violation of this article. 
(d)  After the city manager or designee makes a recommendation to the city council to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the city council, or such board as it may designate, will conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation. 
(1)  At the hearing, the city manager or his designee proceeds first and presents all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. 
(2)  After the city manager or his designee makes his presentation, the licensee or the licensee's legal counsel, will present evidence and argument as to why the license issued hereunder should not be suspended or revoked. The city council or its designee will have the right to ask questions at any time. 
(3)  After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the city council will render a decision. The suspension or revocation of an escort or dating service license is final. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 10), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-105. - Proration of license fee. 
No license fees established in this article shall be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 8, § 12), 12-1-2005) 
Secs. 26-106—26-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SPAS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-09-15, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, amended Art. IV to read as set out herein. Former Art. IV, §§ 26-126—28-128, 26-153—26-160, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1,(ch. 11, art. 7, §§ (1)—(9), adopted Dec. 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2011-07-08, adopted July 12, 2011. 
State Law reference— Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.; local regulation of massage, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22. 

Sec. 26-126. - Purpose. 
In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, it is the purpose of this article to regulate the operation of massage and spa establishments and to regulate the practice of massage therapy by massage therapists that have not been licensed by the state, who restrict their practice to the manipulation of the soft tissue of the hands, feet, or ears of the human body, who do not have clients disrobe, and who do not hold themselves out as a massage therapist whose practice is licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-127. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity applying for a license to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment, as defined herein, or a person applying for a work permit, as provided herein. 
Massage or massage therapy means the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including, but not limited to, the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range-of-motion stretches, a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of water, oils, lotions, creams, lubricants, salt glows or scrubs, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, cold packs or other topical preparations. This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry or medicine is required by the state. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power which is utilized by a massage therapist for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means any business or commercial establishment: 
(1)  a.  Having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage which employs or contracts with one or more massage therapists or operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus; or 
b.  Which, for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages; and 
(2)  Which has fixed a place of business where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities defined as "massage." 
The term "massage establishment" shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Massage therapist means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. 
Spa establishment means any business or commercial establishment operated to derive income from the provision of any of the following personal services: body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak, or other similar personal services purported to assist patrons with improving their physical condition or appearance and which require the patron to disrobe. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-128. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-129. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license or work permit only and shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent or restrict in any manner: 
(1)  Any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, massage therapist that is not operating a massage or spa establishment, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state, while engaged in the practice of said profession; 
(2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state; or 
(3)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-130. - License required; application. 
(a)  In addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate pursuant to chapter 54, article V, all persons, firms or corporations operating or desiring to operate a massage or spa establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business or profession, make application to the city for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this article. Applications for licenses shall be made on forms provided by the city. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the application must be executed by an officer, member, partner or shareholder, as applicable, and if not the same person as the applicant, the employee or agent primarily responsible for the operation of the massage or spa establishment. The applicant for a license to operate a massage or spa establishment must be the owner of the premises wherein the business will be conducted or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. All applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant, and other required signatories, of all material facts as determined by the city manager to be relevant to the requirements of this article, along with the following: 
(1)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(2)  Copies of all required state licenses with regard to each employee, independent contractor, agent and partner, general or limited, associated with the operation of the massage therapy establishment. Those employees who will be performing massages, and/or managers or supervisors, who are exempt from getting a state license pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 24A, shall comply with the work permits provision of this article, section 26-132 below. 
(3)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor, then the partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall submit a complete list of the legal entity's: 
a.  Officers; 
b.  Directors; 
c.  Partners, members, or shareholders (natural persons) holding a ten-percent or greater ownership interest in such legal entity, or if there is no shareholder (natural person) with at least a ten-percent interest, the ten shareholders with the greatest ownership interest; 
d.  The name of the employee or agent primarily responsible for operation of the massage or spa establishment; and 
e.  The names of all on-premises managers or supervisors for the massage or spa establishment. Such list shall include the names, current addresses, phone numbers and occupations of the aforementioned natural persons. 
(4)  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity required to be chartered under the laws of the state or to be authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state, such legal entity must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state and must submit copies of the certificate of organization or incorporation, as applicable, and articles of organization or incorporation, as applicable. 
(5)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver's license or a valid identification card as reliable proof thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver's license or a valid identification card for each person listed in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(6)  A sworn and notarized statement of a registered agent who is a resident of Fulton County, Georgia, and at least 18 years of age, designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the applicant. 
(b)  A license issued to an individual shall be in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership, in the name of a partner or officer, and, if other than the named partner or officer, in the name of the employee or agent primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. A license issued to a limited liability company shall be issued in the name of the limited liability company, in the name of one member or officer, and, if other than the named member or officer, in the name of the employee or agent primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. A license issued to a corporation shall be issued in the name of the corporation, in the name of at least one shareholder (listed pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section) or officer of the corporation, and if other than the named shareholder or officer, in the name of the employee or agent primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. 
(c)  No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment unless it shall appear that such person, or if the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, all persons listed in subsection (a)(3) of this section, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such license have not been convicted or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving: 
(1)  Illegal gambling; 
(2)  Any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, disorderly conduct, or misdemeanor involving any type of sexual-related crime; 
(3)  Any theft or violence against person or property; 
(4)  Any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; 
(5)  Distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law; or 
(6)  Criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses. 
(d)  No person under the age of 18 shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity shall not be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment if any of the persons listed in subsection (a)(3) of this section are under the age of 18. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
State Law reference— Authority for regulation of massage parlors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 26-131. - Regulatory fee; expiration. 
(a)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee, consisting of a nonrefundable investigative fee and a license fee, for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the city. The nonrefundable investigative fee and the license fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. The nonrefundable investigative fee and the licensee fee shall be paid with the license application and shall not be prorated under any circumstances. If the applicant withdraws the application or the license is denied, the applicant shall be refunded the license fee paid. No refund shall be allowed once the license has been issued. 
(b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and expire on December 31 of each year. Each subsequent application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. Existing licensees shall file applications by December 1 of each year for the following license year. Applications received after December 1 shall be subject to a ten-percent late fee. 
(c)  Any person applying hereunder who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid Federal Income Taxes. 
(d)  No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Charter reference— Regulatory fee authorized, § 1.03(b)(4). 
State Law reference— Authority to assess regulatory fees on massage parlors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 26-132. - Work permits required. 
(a)  A work permit shall be required for any and all: 
(1)  On-premises owners, managers or supervisors who are in charge of managing the massage or spa establishment as required by subsection (c) below and who do not otherwise hold a license issued hereunder; and 
(2)  Massage therapists not possessing a state-issued massage therapist's license who desire to engage in the business, trade or profession of massage therapy or manage a massage and/or spa establishment. A work permit does not authorize an individual to perform any activity requiring state licensure. 
(b)  Massage therapists who hold a current and valid massage therapist license issued by the State of Georgia do not have to obtain a work permit, but shall provide a copy of their state license to the city and post their state license in a conspicuous place in the licensed establishment at all times while the license remains valid. 
(c)  No licensee shall allow any person to work at the premises if such person is required to have a state-mandated license or work permit pursuant to this section until such person has procured such license or permit. For new employees, a receipt for submitted license or permit application with the city issued by the city manager or designee may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. Licensees and all managers and/or supervisors of any massage or spa establishment are required by this article to inspect and verify that each employee, required to have a valid state license or city work permit, has in his/her possession the required license or permit at all times, and failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  Any person required to obtain a work permit shall apply to the city manager or designee for such permit. A separate work permit per individual is required for employment at each establishment within the city. The permit will be valid for a period of one year from the date on which the application is received by the city and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit shall make themselves available for photographing and such other investigation as may be required by the city. The nonrefundable fee for a work permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. Replacement permit(s) shall be issued upon payment of one-half of the fee(s) charged for work permits. 
(e)  The city manager or designee may suspend or revoke a work permit, following notice and hearing pursuant to this article, and demand its return where the permit holder violates the provisions of this article, any state law or applicable local ordinance. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person whose work permit has been suspended or revoked to refuse to return the work permit to the city manager or designee or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the work permit. 
(g)  An applicant for a work permit shall not have been convicted within the five years preceding his/her application of any federal, state or local law involving crimes set forth in subsection 26-130(c) of this article. A guilty plea, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered. 
(h)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued a work permit if the city manager or designee receives information which provides a basis for a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that would require the revocation of the work permit, the work permit may be revoked following notice and a hearing. 
(i)  When the city manager intends to deny or revoke any work permit, the city manager or designee shall issue to the applicant or permit holder a letter setting forth the reasons for denial or revocation, and the letter shall notify the applicant of his or her right to an administrative hearing before the city manager or designee, which hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of section 26-136. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-133. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all massage and spa establishments granted a license under this article to keep on file the name of all persons working at the massage or spa establishment, their home addresses and home telephone numbers, their duties and services performed for the massage or spa establishment and whether such employee has a state license or city work permit. The holder of a license issued under the provisions of this article must additionally report changes in the list of persons working at the massage or spa establishment with the names and required supplemental information for new employees to be filed with the city manager or designee within ten days from the date of such change. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all massage and spa establishments granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment or services at such establishment, the type of treatment or services administered and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment or services. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city manager or designee, or the chief of police or designee. 
(c)  The massage or spa establishment shall have an owner, manager or supervisor on the premises at all hours the establishment offers massage therapy. If during an inspection there is no owner, manager or supervisor on the premises, the establishment must cease operations and close to the public until an owner, manager or supervisor is on the premises. Such owner, manager or supervisor, in addition to the licensee, shall be responsible to make sure all persons performing massage therapy at any time has either an appropriate state license or city work permit and their failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years beyond the expiration date of a license. Records shall be made available to the city manager or designee, during business hours, at the licensee's business location in the city, within ten business days of any such request. 
(e)  The massage or spa establishment shall be subject to inspection at any time during business hours by the city manager or designee and by the chief of police or designee, to ensure compliance with this article. 
(f)  All employees and other persons on the premises, with the exception of customers receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this article, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck, and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or a skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(g)  No massage or spa establishment shall be engaged in business or be open for business except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(h)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance a massage or spa establishment identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(i)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code and at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(j)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any massage or spa establishment. 
(k)  A massage or spa establishment, prior to the issuance of a license hereunder, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage or spa establishment for the purpose of a massage or massage therapy unless such person carries at the time of such patronage a written order by a regularly-licensed physician directing the treatment or written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the massage or spa establishment to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize a massage or spa establishment for the purpose of a massage or massage therapy and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person. 
(m)  No massage therapist or any of his or her employees shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs or anus of any person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-134. - Issuance of license; denial. 
(a)  When a license application for the operation of a massage or spa establishment is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted, and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the city manager or designee. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the city shall cause to be conducted a criminal background investigation of the applicant and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the background investigation and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the city manager or designee shall either issue the license or deny the application within 60 days of receiving the completed application. The city manager or his designee shall deny any application that: 
(1)  Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified in this article; 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in this section; or 
(3)  Contains false, misleading or incomplete information in the application or attached documents. 
(c)  Service of any notice for denial, suspension or revocation of a massage or spa establishment license under this article shall be delivered by hand or posted by certified and first class mail to the applicant's address as provided on the application. Delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following deposit in the United States Mail. 
(d)  Should the city manager or designee deny an application under this article, written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant by the city manager or designee setting forth the reason(s) for the denial, and advising the applicant of the right to appeal. 
(e)  Any decision by the city manager or designee denying, suspending or revoking an application shall be final unless the applicant files a notice of appeal with the city manager or designee within 30 days of receiving notice of such denial. Any such appeal shall be subject to de novo review and shall be in accordance with section 26-136. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-135. - Grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
The license of a massage or spa establishment may be denied, revoked or suspended upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or holder has failed to meet or maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The applicant or holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in being issued the license for the massage or spa establishment; 
(3)  The applicant or holder is engaged in the operation of a massage or spa establishment under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another massage therapist of a like or different name; 
(4)  The applicant or holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire or disorderly conduct, criminal solicitation of any of the foregoing offenses, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony; 
(5)  Any of the applicant's or holder's employees, independent contractors or agents has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, criminal solicitation of any of the foregoing offenses, or disorderly conduct in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment; 
(6)  The applicant or holder has failed to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this article; 
(7)  The applicant or holder has failed to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, independent contractors, agents, customers or others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; 
(8)  The applicant or holder, or employees, agents or independent contractors associated with the establishment, have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article; or 
(9)  The applicant or holder has violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-136. - Hearings. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager or designee determines there is cause to deny, suspend or revoke a license or work permit issued hereunder, the city manager or designee shall give the licensee written notice at least 15 days prior to an administrative hearing of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement or the charge(s) upon which the administrative hearing before the city manager or designee shall be held in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The procedure for administrative hearings heard by the city manager under this article shall be set forth by the city manager. The city manager or designee shall reach a decision on the matter before him or her within ten days following the close of the hearing and shall give written notice of said decision to the licensee. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final unless the licensee or permit holder files a notice of appeal to the city manager or designee within 30 days of receiving notice of said decision. 
(c)  The city council or a designated hearing officer shall hear appeals to decisions by the city manager or designee to deny applications for permits, as well as appeals to decisions by the city manager or designee to suspend or revoke such permits. 
(d)  Any such appeal to the city council or designated hearing officer shall be subject to de novo review and shall be in accordance with subsections (d), (e) and (f) hereof. A hearing before the city council or the designated hearing officer shall be scheduled within 60 days following the receipt by the city manager or designee of the applicant, licensee or work permit holder's notice of appeal. 
(e)  Applicants, licensees or work permit holders shall be given no less than 20 days' written notice of the date, time, and place when the matter at issue will be heard by the city council or the designated hearing officer. The applicant, licensee or work permit holder shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence. 
(f)  The procedure for hearings of the city council or hearing officer under this article shall conform to the administrative hearings procedure as passed by resolution of the city council. Upon close of the public hearing, the city council or hearing officer shall reach a decision on the matter before it, and the decision of the city council or hearing officer shall be final unless the applicant or permit holder applies to the county superior court by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council or hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-15, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 26-137. - Remedies. 
(a)  Any premises, building, dwelling, or other structure in which a massage establishment or spa establishment is operated or maintained in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel shall be authorized to bring an action in the Superior Court of Fulton County to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin the use of such premises as a massage establishment or spa establishment in the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(b)  The operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment by a person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel shall be authorized to bring an action in the Superior Court of Fulton County to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin such operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(c)  It shall not be necessary, in order to obtain an injunction under this section, to allege or prove that there is no adequate remedy at law or to allege or prove any special injury. 
(d)  If the court declares a massage establishment or spa establishment to be a nuisance, or if the court issues an injunction against a massage establishment or spa establishment pursuant to this article, the city shall be entitled, on motion, to recover its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in bringing the action. 
( Ord. No. 2016-03-05 , § I, 3-1-2016) 
Secs. 26-138—26-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNSHOPS, PAWNBROKERS, JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; used motor vehicle and used motor vehicle parts dealers, O.C.G.A. § 42-47-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-39-1 et seq.; pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 26-186. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accepted identification means an official document, most commonly in the form of a plastic coated/sealed card, government issued for purposes of identification, or valid driver's license. Such a document must be issued by one of the 50 states or a branch of the U.S. Military, i.e., Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Coast Guard, or be a current probation or parole card of the state and its counties. At a minimum, the identification must bear a true photograph of the person presenting it, date of birth, description of the person, and an address for the person. Should the address be other than a residence address, i.e., a post office box, a residence address must be provided and supported by documentation, including, but not being limited to, a lease, a utility bill, a property tax bill, or a mobile telephone bill. 
Bailment means the placing of possession of personal property or title belonging to one person in another person who subsequently holds possession. 
Deceptive business practice means: 
(1)  Possession or any use of a false weight or measurement, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity in connection with any scale or service; 
(2)  Any sale or offer to sell or delivery of less than the represented quality or quantity; 
(3)  Any attempt by a buyer or broker to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity, when it is this buyer or broker who furnishes the weight or measure; 
(4)  Any service which is of an unreasonably lesser quality than the service offered or represented; 
(5)  Any other practice designated as unlawful by O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; and 
(6)  Any other fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of the state. 
Employee means any individual who works in a pawnshop and specifically includes both independent contractors and individuals who may also have any kind of ownership interest in the pawnshop. 
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony or any crime involving theft, drugs, fraud or a crime against property in the past ten years. The ten-year period shall commence from the date of any such conviction. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Occupation tax certificate means permission to operate a business evidenced by an occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to chapter 54, article V, pertaining to business occupation tax, licenses and regulation. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment, of personal property or title as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the express or implied power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property or title on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or within this form of business purchasing tangible personal property or title from persons or sources other than manufacturers or regulated dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described herein. 
Pawnshop means any business involving in any part the pledge, pawn, or exchange of any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property or title as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop permit means permission to operate a pawnshop regulated by the city police department. 
Permit means permission to be employed or work in a pawnshop regulated by the city police department. 
Secondhand dealer means any person or business which is not a pawnbroker, but does, exclusively or as incidental to or in connection with other business, purchases, sells or acquires in trade used or secondhand jewelry, flat silver, gold, and silver objects of every kind and description, including watches and clocks, any of which is made in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals; diamonds, emeralds, rubies, or other precious stones; pistols or guns; musical instruments, bicycles or accessories. Any person or business which shall purchase any item of the kinds herein described from any person other than a bona fide dealer in those items shall, for the purpose of making the reports required herein, also be a secondhand dealer and subject to all the provisions of this article relating to those records and reports. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 2), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-187. - Penalties for violation. 
Except as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 11), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-188. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article is intended to regulate the conduct and activities of pawnbrokers and pawnshops, as defined hereafter, in order to reduce and curtail the criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses; to aid the city police department in detection and prevention of criminal conduct; and to ensure fair dealing between a pawnbroker and customers. 
(b)  This article is further intended to regulate specified conduct and activities of secondhand dealers, as defined in section 26-186. The provisions of section 26-191—26-196 are applicable to secondhand dealers. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 1), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-189. - Pawnshop employees. 
(a)  All persons employed or working in a pawnshop as defined in section 26-186 shall first obtain a permit from the city allowing the person to be employed or work in a pawnshop. Permit license fees for employees shall be set by resolution of the city council, and shall remain in effect from year to year, until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  In order for a permit to be issued, the person must meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Must be 18 years of age or older; 
(2)  Must be of good moral character as defined in section 26-186, to wit: must not have within the past ten years been convicted of, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony or any crime involving, theft, drugs, fraud or a crime against property; 
(3)  Must disclose ownership or interest in any other pawnshop, whether located in or out of the state. An interest shall be deemed to exist if the person or a member of his or her family is the outright owner of the pawnshop; a co-owner of the pawnshop; a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of the pawnshop; or a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of the pawnshop; 
(4)  Shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the city police department, and the city shall have ten days to investigate the information provided. 
(c)  Until a permit is issued, the person shall not work in the pawnshop. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to ensure that the provisions of this section are met. 
(e)  Should any information provided pursuant to this section change after original approval has been granted, the employee shall notify the city police department of such change and in any event provide the correct information prior to any renewal. 
(f)  Should a permit be denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of the denial, apply to the city police department for a hearing. Any decision from such a hearing may be appealed to the city manager or his designee, who shall issue such order as appropriate after a hearing. 
(g)  Conviction of violating any of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance of the city, rules or regulations of the city, or conviction of any felony or any crime involving theft, drugs, fraud or a crime against property within the past ten years shall automatically revoke any permit previously issued. 
(h)  So long as the person continues to meet the requirements of this article, the permit shall be renewed on a calendar year basis. The renewal fee for the permit shall be paid at the time the renewal application is filed by January 1 of the year for which the permit is requested. The renewal permit fee shall be set by resolution of the city council, and shall remain in effect from year to year, until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 3), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-190. - Occupation tax certificate and pawnshop permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage, conduct or carry on within the city any pawnshop without a currently valid occupation tax certificate as required by chapter 54, article V, pertaining to business and occupation taxes, and a currently valid pawnshop permit as required by this article. 
(b)  In addition to the occupation tax certificate, an application for a pawnshop permit authorizing the operation of a pawnshop regulated by the city police department shall be submitted along with payment of a nonrefundable application fee as set by resolution of the city council and which shall remain in effect from year to year, until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. So long as the requirements of this article are met, the permit shall be renewed on a calendar year basis. The renewal fee shall be paid at the time the renewal application is filed by January 1 of the year for which the permit is requested. The renewal permit fee shall be set by resolution of the city council, and shall remain in effect from year to year until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Occupation tax certificate and a pawnshop permit shall be personal to and nontransferable by an applicant, a holder thereof, or by operation of law; provided, however, that if the applicant or holder is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of the occupation tax certificate and pawnshop permit, and, in such case, upon notification to the city the occupation tax certificate and pawnshop permit shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(d)  The occupation tax certificate number and pawnshop permit number shall be printed on the front window of the regulated premises in uniform letters not less than three inches in height and shall read: "City of Sandy Springs Pawnshop Certificate Number _____ and City of Sandy Springs Pawnshop Permit Number_____." 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 4), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-191. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  A book shall be kept and shall have entered an accurate description of all property which is acquired by purchase or trade, and the name, address, estimated age, weight, and height of the person from whom purchased or acquired and the date and hour of purchase. These entries shall be made as soon as possible after the transaction, but in no case, more than one hour thereafter. 
(b)  Each entry in this book shall be numbered serially, and the property described in the entry shall have attached to it a tag bearing the same serial number. 
(c)  This book shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the city police department. 
(d)  A daily report shall be made electronically to the chief of police, in such format as may be prescribed by him, of all property purchased or acquired during the 24 hours ending at 12:00 midnight on the date of the report. 
(e)  All property purchased or acquired shall, at all times, be subject to examination and inspection by the city police department. If, upon any inspection, a police officer shall have reasonable cause to believe that any of the property is stolen, he shall segregate it. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the person in possession of the property to dispose of or damage the property in any manner, until 15 days have elapsed from the date of the inspection. 
(f)  All property purchased or acquired shall be held for not less than 15 days. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to acquire by purchase, pawn, or trade any watch, clock, pistol, gun, automobile tire or battery, or any other item commonly branded with a serial number, upon which the number has been mutilated or altered. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to buy or receive any property from any person less than 18 years of age, provided that any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer who obtains and retains a copy of accepted identification shall not be subject to this provision. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 5), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-192. - Additional requirements applicable to pawnshops and pawnbrokers. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of this article or other provisions of ordinances of the city, the following requirements shall be applicable: 
(1)  Pawnbrokers shall comply with all provisions of O.C.G.A. title 44, ch. 12, art. 3, pt. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.), addressing and regulating pawnbrokers and their business operations in the state. 
(2)  A fingerprint of each person pawning, pledging or selling any article shall be obtained. It should be of the right hand index finger, unless this finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. In the event the right hand is missing, the fingerprint should be of the left index finger, unless such finger is missing, then the print of the next finger in existence on the left hand shall be fingerprinted, and notation made of the exact finger. These prints shall be made on forms prescribed by the city police department and each form shall be completed in full as to each and every transaction regardless of whether the person may have previously pawned an article and thus been previously fingerprinted. 
(3)  A photograph of each person pawning, pledging or selling any article or articles shall be taken and retained by the pawnbroker. 
(4)  Further, acceptable identification shall be required from any person pawning, pledging, or selling an article, and the number of this identification document, along with any other information required, shall be copied and retained by the pawnbroker. 
(5)  The pawnshop broker and any employee shall have the affirmative duty to compare all pictures, physical descriptions and signatures on the identification presented and shall not transact any business with a person who appears to be presenting false or altered identification. If the identification presented is not a state-issued identification, the pawnshop broker and any employee will have the affirmative duty of providing the listed address from the identification as well as a current state address on the transaction paperwork. The pawnbroker is required to check the customer's identification for each transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 6), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-193. - Avoidance by city employees of conflict of interest. 
(a)  No employee of the city or its contracted agents shall have any interest in a pawnshop within the city. 
(b)  No employee of the city or its contracted agents may own, work in or be employed (paid or unpaid) by a pawnshop. 
(c)  The provisions in section 26-192 shall further apply to any employee of the city who is related to any person by consanguinity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 7), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-194. - Restrictions of sale or pledge of building glass, plumbing materials, and building materials. 
It is unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase, advance money on, or take in pawn glass taken from buildings, such as mantel mirrors, art glass and the like, or copper wire, copper linings of bathtubs, lead pipes or any kind of plumbing materials sold as junk, or other types of unused building materials where the same is offered for sale or pawned by other than persons of known good character. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 8), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-195. - Lost or damaged goods. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lost means destroyed or having disappeared due to any cause, known or unknown, that results in the pledged goods being unavailable for return to the pledgor. 
(b)  Any person presenting a pawn ticket to the pawnbroker along with acceptable identification shall be presumed to be the pledgor or seller and shall be entitled to redeem the pledged goods described in the ticket. In the event the described goods are lost or damaged while in the possession of the pawnbroker, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to replace the lost or damaged goods with like kinds of merchandise or settle upon a cash price. Proof of replacement shall be a defense to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 9), 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 26-196. - Failure of pawnshop compliance. 
Any pawnshop operated, conducted or maintained contrary to any of the provisions of this article and the provisions of the laws of the state addressing and regulating pawnbrokers and their business operations shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such pawnshop and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a pawnshop contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be, per se, grounds for suspension or revocation of an occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-72, § 1(ch. 11, art. 3, § 10), 9-19-2006) 
Secs. 26-197—26-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESMEN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-215. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensed solicitor means and includes any person who has obtained a valid permit as hereinafter provided, which permit is in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence means and includes every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 5, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-216. - Penalties. 
Except as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 5, § 7), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-217. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of soliciting without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in this article. 
(b)  The requirement of subsection (a) of this section is meant to apply to door-to-door solicitations for commercial transactions for profit only. 
(1)  It is not meant to regulate solicitation for charitable, political, or other nonprofit purposes provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. 
(2)  It does not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state, or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(c)  Each person shall at all times while soliciting in the city carry upon his person the permit so issued and the same shall be exhibited by such solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(d)  Each permit issued shall contain the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the solicitor is employed by or represents, a photograph of the solicitor, and physical description. Such photograph shall be provided by the solicitor and shall be at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(e)  The permit shall state the expiration date thereof. In no event shall a permit be valid for more than six months. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 5, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-218. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Application for a permit shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The city manager shall have applications available on request. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address, also business address if other than present address; 
(2)  Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address; 
(3)  Age of applicant; 
(4)  Physical description of the applicant; 
(5)  Name and address of the person or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents, and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)  Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer; 
(7)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(8)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
(9)  Proposed route, including streets to be included on each day, which applicant intends to follow; 
(10)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for permit under this chapter, if any; 
(11)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, or any other violation of any state or federal law; 
(12)  Names of magazines, books, or journals to be sold; 
(13)  Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house; 
(14)  Proposed method of operation; 
(15)  Description and license plate number of vehicle intended to be operated by applicant; 
(16)  Signature of applicant. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the city police department in connection with the application for the permit. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application, nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, nor to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. 
(f)  The fee for a permit shall be as determined by the city council. The permit shall be for a six-month period for each solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 5, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-219. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city manager if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this article. 
(b)  Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. 
(c)  Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the permit shall become null and void and must be turned in to the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 5, § 4), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-220. - Routes. 
To the extent practical, each solicitor shall identify the streets and routes that he will follow on each day he is engaged in the business of soliciting. If changes in routes are made, then such changes must be immediately reported to the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 5, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 26-221. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Any licensed solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating, or misrepresentation, whether himself or through an employee, while acting as a solicitor in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether licensed under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 5, § 6), 12-1-2005) 
Secs. 26-222—26-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAXICABS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-06-24, adopted June 15, 2010, repealed article VII, §§ 26-251—26-265, in its entirety and enacted a new article VII, §§ 26-251—26-267, as set out herein. Formerly, said article pertained to same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 11, §§ 1—14), adopted Dec. 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2006-08-60, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 2006. 

Sec. 26-251. - Operation of taxicab to be in compliance with article. 
No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall operate a taxicab in the City of Sandy Springs ("city") except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-252. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Operator means the individual driver operating a taxicab on behalf of an owner. 
Owner means any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity conducting a business providing taxicab services for hire by the public. 
Taxicab means any passenger-carrying vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers for hire which does not have fixed termini, including, but not limited to, any unmarked automobiles used in the business of transporting passengers for hire by contract or requested special services that do not have fixed termini. 
Taximeter means a device that automatically calculates, at a predetermined rate, and indicates the charge for hire of a vehicle. Taxicabs operating with non-electronic taximeters shall be furnished with a sign, approved by the City of Sandy Springs Code Enforcement Division, immediately adjacent to the taximeter which explains the way the fare shall be calculated if the taximeter reaches its highest fare before the passenger's destination is reached. This sign shall be pointed out to the passenger by the driver at the beginning of the trip. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-253. - Operations deemed to be doing business in the city. 
A taxicab shall be deemed to be doing business in the city when its original terminus, that is to say, the place from which it operates and is subject to calls, shall be located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-254. - Annual business occupation tax, license and permit fees. 
(a)  In addition to the business occupation tax certificate, a license fee is hereby levied per annum for each taxicab maintained or operated, and a permit fee is hereby levied per annum for each operator's permit. The license and permit fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city council. There shall be no prorating of any annual fee. 
(b)  The business occupation tax shall be in accordance with the current business occupation tax ordinance. The following criteria must be met to maintain a business for which a business occupation tax certificate shall issue: 
(1)  Establishment and maintenance of a permanent office in a commercially-zoned area of the city. 
(2)  Submission of a copy of current lease or proof of ownership of office space. 
(3)  Establishment and maintenance of a publicly-listed business telephone number. 
(4)  Maintenance of the name and home address of each operator affiliated with the company. 
(5)  Maintenance of off-street parking lot capable of accommodating all company vehicles. 
(6)  Maintenance of a file for each vehicle containing proof of all current documentation, including, but not being limited to, copies of the vehicle's registration, proof of insurance, and taxicab license. 
(7)  Possession of a valid six-month auto insurance policy from a company licensed to do business in Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-255. - Required business occupation tax certificate, licenses and permits for operation. 
(a)  Requirements of owner. No owner shall conduct the business of operating taxicabs in the city until the owner has first applied for and obtained a business occupation tax certificate and a license for each taxicab, as well as the required certificate of inspection for each taxicab as provided in section 26-257 of this article. The applications for the business occupation tax certificate and license(s) shall be made to the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division upon forms provided for that purpose. The licenses for each vehicle shall be issued by the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division. Permits for operators shall be issued by the City of Sandy Springs Police Department. 
(b)  Description of business. The application of an owner to obtain a business occupation tax certificate shall contain, among other things, a detailed description of the vehicle(s) to be used in the business, the name of the operator(s) thereof, and the address and telephone number of the office or call station from which the business is operated. 
(c)  Requirements of operator. Every operator shall apply for a permit to operate a taxi cab with the City of Sandy Springs Police Department. The operator shall provide proof of a valid driver's license from the State Department of Driver Services and a copy of the operator's driving history report (MVR) from the State Department of Driver Services. No operator shall operate a taxi cab for hire in the corporate limits of the city unless such person has in his possession a valid operator's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-256. - Required insurance coverage. 
No owner shall be issued a taxicab license(s) or continue operating unless the owner shall file with the business tax division a policy of indemnity insurance with an indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in Georgia, which policy shall have minimum liability limits equal to or in excess of the following sums for each taxicab operated: 
(1)  For bodily injury to each person, $50,000.00; 
(2)  For bodily injury to all persons sustained in any one accident, $50,000.00; and 
(3)  For property damage and liability for baggage of passengers, $25,000.00. 
The policy shall be conditioned to protect individuals against injury or damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of the holder of an operator's permit. Additional operators or new operators hired after issuance of the occupation tax certificate are required to be included as an insured operator by a rider to the policy prior to the issuance of an operator's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-257. - Standards for taxicab vehicles. 
The following standards are applicable for a license to be issued to an owner of the business for the operation of each taxicab: 
(1)  Ages of vehicles. The owner is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business by an operator is no more than six years old. By December of each year, automobiles of a model year seven years prior to that year must be replaced. 
(2)  Annual renewal. All fees for taxicab operator permits and taxicab licenses are due no later than June 30 of each year. 
(3)  Certificate of inspection. A certificate of inspection completed on forms provided by the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division and issued by an ASE-certified mechanic shall be located inside the taxicab at all times certifying that the taxicab and equipment therein are safe and in compliance with applicable law. This certificate must be renewed every 90 days, and the operator of a taxicab shall be required to keep his taxicab in safe condition conforming to all laws under penalty of having his permit to operate a taxicab suspended or revoked. 
(4)  Taximeter inspection. Each operator of a taxicab shall have proof of taximeter inspection and calibration contained in the taxicab for issuance and renewal of taxi decal. 
The City of Sandy Springs Police Department and/or Code Enforcement Department may conduct random inspections to ensure the safe condition of a taxicab for the welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-258. - Additional vehicles. 
The owner of a taxi business shall register with the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division each additional vehicle put in use as a taxicab, and same shall be subject to inspection and registration as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-259. - Operators; qualifications. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a taxicab business to file with the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division the names and addresses, age, and physical description of all persons employed as operators. All operators shall hold licenses from the state department of driver services as drivers of vehicles for hire and operator permits issued by the city police department. No person shall be employed or shall drive a taxicab who has, within the past five years, been convicted of, pled guilty to, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 6, to the offense of driving under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, to any open container violations, to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, battery, or the violation of a spirituous, vinous, or malt beverage statute, or if the operator has been convicted of an offense of causing death by vehicle. No operator can be issued a taxi operator's permit if the operator has received three or more moving violations in the preceding 12-month period. 
(b)  All fees for permits issued to an operator of a taxi cab are due no later than June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-260. - Taxi stands; parking. 
Operators of taxicabs shall not park taxicabs in any congested area. The parking of taxicabs shall be subject at all times to regulation by the police department and direction of a police officer when desirable for the relief of an emergency traffic condition. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-261. - Information to be displayed. 
(a)  The operator of each taxicab shall have posted in his taxicab, in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, a map or street guide of the city, the name and photograph of the operator of the taxicab, and a schedule of fares. Each taxicab shall also bear on the outside thereof a numbered decal to be issued to the owner by the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division at the time of issuance of the taxicab license. 
(b)  The owner is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business bears on the outside, in addition to the numbered decal, the name of the owner and business telephone number, which must be permanently affixed to the taxicab, and a dome light on the roof which must be at least six inches in height, permanently affixed to the roof, and bear the term "taxi" or the company name. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-262. - Owners responsible for violations by operators. 
To the extent provided by law, the business owner is responsible for violations of this article by the taxicab operators of the business owner, whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-263. - Notice of denial of license. 
In the event that an application is denied, the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division shall provide the applicant with written notice stating the reason for denial of the taxicab license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-264. - Suspension or revocation of an owner license. 
(a)  No license issued to an owner may be transferred. 
(b)  Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of the city now in force or hereafter adopted. 
(c)  Whenever the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division determines there is cause to suspend or revoke a license of an owner issued hereunder, the City of Sandy Springs Revenue Division shall give the owner ten days' written notice of intention to recommend suspension or revocation of the license to the city manager. A license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The original application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article; 
(3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to an owner as holder of a license under this article; 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing an operator to operate in the city in violation of the provisions of this article; 
(5)  Allowing an operator to drive a taxicab for the owner when the owner has been made aware by the city that the operator is not qualified under provisions hereunder to operate a taxicab in the city; 
(6)  For violation of any part of this article applicable to the owner. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation. 
(1)  At the hearing, the city proceeds first and presents all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. 
(2)  After the city's presentation, the owner may present evidence and argument as to why the license issued to the owner should not be suspended or revoked. 
(3)  The city manager or his designee shall have the right to ask questions of any party at any time. 
(4)  After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the city manager or his designee shall render a decision which shall be final unless the owner files a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-265. - Revocation of a taxi operator permit. 
A taxi operator may have his permit to drive a taxi in the city revoked by the chief of police if the operator has been convicted of having at least three moving violations in any 12 consecutive month period or has had a suspension or revocation entered on the operator's driver's license record with the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-266. - Penalty for violation. 
Violation of any of the sections of this article or any part thereof shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, and the court shall be authorized upon entry of a plea of guilty, a finding of guilty, or entry of a nolo contendere plea to impose a sentence of incarceration in the city jail of up to six months and impose a fine of up to $1,000.00, or a combination of both incarceration and fine, for each violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-267. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon adoption. Registration and payment of license and permit fees shall be conducted in accordance with the terms of this article on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-24, 6-15-2010) 
Secs. 26-268—26-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LIMOUSINES 

Sec. 26-291. - Operation of limousines to be in compliance with article. 
No person shall operate any limousine for the transportation of passengers for compensation in the City of Sandy Springs ("city") except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-22, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-292. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate means a certificate issued by the Public Service Commission of the State of Georgia to a limousine carrier. 
Chauffeur means any person with a Georgia State Driver's License who meets the qualifications as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.10 and who is authorized by the Commissioner of Driver Services of the State of Georgia to drive a limousine. 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for a luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than ten passengers and with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle, and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit; further, no vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and a limousine. 
Limousine carrier means any person operating a service regularly rendered to the public by furnishing transportation as a motor common carrier for hire, not over fixed routes, by means of limousines, or extended limousines, on the basis of telephone or written contract. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, or joint-stock association, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or personal representative thereof. 
Public highway means every public street, road, or highway in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-22, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-293. - Operations deemed to be doing business in the city. 
A limousine carrier shall be deemed to be doing business in the city when its original terminus, that is to say, the place from which it operates and receives dispatch calls, shall be located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-22, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-294. - Annual business occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  No person shall conduct the business of limousine carrier in the city until the person has first applied for and obtained a business occupation tax certificate as provided in article I of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to all other information required to be provided by this chapter relating to the issuance of a business occupation tax certificate, the applicant must hold and provide proof of a current and valid certificate issued by the Public Service Commission of the State of Georgia to a limousine carrier pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.1 et seq. and must further provide a detailed description of the limousines(s) to be used in the business, the name of the chauffeur(s) thereof, proof of the permit issued to the chauffeur pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.10, and the address and telephone number of the office or call station from which the business is operated. 
(c)  Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this article or by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.1 et seq., all provisions and terms contained in article I of this chapter shall apply to a limousine carrier in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-22, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 26-295. - Limousine parking. 
Limousine chauffeurs shall not park limousines in any congested area. The parking of limousines shall be subject at all times to regulation by the police department and direction of a police officer when desirable for the relief of an emergency traffic condition. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06-22, 6-15-2010) 
ARTICLE IX. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS 

Sec. 26-296. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police shall mean the chief of the Sandy Springs Police Department. 
Precious metals means any gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
Precious metals dealer means any person or entity who, exclusively or as incidental to or in connection with any other business, is engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or goods made from precious metals from persons or sources other than industrial producers, manufacturers or licensed dealers. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-297. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article is intended to regulate the conduct and activities of precious metals dealers in order to reduce and curtail the criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses; to aid the city police department in detection and prevention of criminal conduct; and to ensure fair dealing between a precious metals dealer and customers. 
(b)  Sections 26-298 to 26-301 shall not apply to any precious metals or goods containing precious metals from industrial producers, manufacturers, dealers or distributors. 
(c)  The provisions of chapter 26, article V shall not apply with respect to the purchase and sale of precious metals or goods containing precious metals by such licensed precious metals dealer. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-298. - Records required. 
(a)  Every precious metals dealer shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase of precious metals or goods containing precious metals, the following information: 
(1)  The date of the purchase transaction. 
(2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller. 
(3)  The name, age and address of the seller of the items purchased; the number from such seller's driver's license or other similar identification; and for transactions conducted in person at the location of the precious metals dealer, a description of the general appearance of such seller or a photograph of the seller. 
(4)  An identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial numbers, model numbers or other numbers, and any identifying marks inscribed therein. 
(5)  The price paid for the precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased by the seller. 
(6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if payment is made by check. 
(7)  The signature of the seller, which may be in electronic form. 
(b)  The permanent record book required in this section shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or goods for a period of four years. 
(c)  Entries shall appear in chronological order in ink. No blank lines may be left between the entries. No obliterations, alterations or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book and all precious metals and goods containing precious metals shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-299. - Daily report to police. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) below, every precious metals dealer shall make a daily report in writing to the police department of all precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. The reports shall be on forms or on duplicate invoices as may be prescribed or approved by the police department. The reports shall be typewritten and mailed or delivered to the police department prior to 10:00 a.m. on the day following the date of the report. In addition to any other information required by the police department, the reports shall include the name and address of the precious metals dealer, date of transaction, description and amount of the precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased and the name and address of the person from whom purchased. 
(b)  In lieu of complying with subsection (a) above, a precious metals dealer may enter each transaction, including all information required in subsection (a) of section 26-298, into an electronic automated reporting system approved by the police department, or upload electronically, a batch file of all transactions for each business day, to an administrator of the electronic automated reporting system approved by the police department, at the conclusion of each business day. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department. 
(c)  The police department may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this section to require the proper enforcement of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-300. - Time period for retention. 
After the purchase or receipt of any precious metals or goods containing precious metals, every precious metals dealer shall retain upon the licensed premises or in a sealed vault off the premises, provided such a precaution is necessary for safekeeping, all such precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased or received, and shall not alter the original form, shape or condition of such metals or goods, for the shorter of (a) 30 days, or (b) the period of time required under O.C.G.A. § 43-37-6(a)(6) (as amended, supplemented, or replaced), if, and only if, a precious metals dealer complies with subsection (b) of section 26-299 with respect to the reporting of such precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased or received. If the chief of police has probable cause to believe any goods are stolen, the chief of police may give notice in writing to the precious metals dealer not to sell such goods for an additional 15 days, and the precious metals dealer shall retain such goods in accordance with the terms hereof during such period. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-301. - Unlawful activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any precious metals dealer or any agent or employee of a precious metals dealer who makes purchases of precious metals or goods containing precious metals to: 
(1)  Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record book as required by section 26-298; 
(2)  Make any false entries therein; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; 
(4)  Fail to submit daily reports as required in section 26-299; 
(5)  Refuse to allow a duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent book or any precious metals or goods containing precious metals in such dealer's possession; 
(6)  Purchase any precious metals or goods containing precious metals commonly branded with a serial number, upon which the number has been mutilated or altered other than as a result normal wear and tear; or 
(7)  Buy or receive any property from any person less than 17 years of age, provided that any precious metals dealer who obtains and retains a copy of accepted identification shall not be subject to this provision. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-302. - Registration required. 
(a)  No person or entity shall engage in business as a precious metals dealer until such person or entity has registered as a precious metals dealer for each separate place of business as provided herein. The registration shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the precious metals dealer. The dealer shall register with the chief of police of the city. The chief of police shall forward a copy of the registration to the sheriff of Fulton County within seven days of registration. 
(b)  The registration shall contain the name, address, and age of precious metals dealer, together with the names, addresses and ages of all other persons having an ownership interest in the business. 
(c)  No person shall be eligible to register as a precious metals dealer if any employee or stockholder, other than stockholders owning less than ten percent of the outstanding shares of a publicly held corporation, has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state or the United States. This provision shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten years have expired from the date of completion of the felony sentence. 
(d)  All registrations shall contain the address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises. 
(e)  If the registrant is a corporation or partnership, the registrant shall submit a copy of the charter or a copy of the articles of partnership or similar document with the application. 
(f)  Each precious metals dealer shall be required to notify the chief of police within seven calendar days of any change of address of the dealer or business or any change of ownership in the business. A copy of the change of address or ownership in the business shall be transmitted to the sheriff of Cobb County within seven days of the notification. 
(g)  Each applicant for registration shall pay an initial registration fee of $25.00 to be retained by the city to cover the cost of registering such persons. The registration shall be renewed annually by payment of a renewal fee of $10.00. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to authorize any person to transact business as a precious metals dealer without a currently valid occupation tax certificate as required by chapter 54, article V, pertaining to business and occupation taxes. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-303. - Penalties for violation. 
Except as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-304. - Failure of precious metals dealer compliance. 
Any precious metals dealer operated, conducted or maintained contrary to any of the provisions of this article and the provisions of the laws of the state addressing and precious metals dealers and their business operations shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such precious metals dealer and restrain and enjoin any person from operating or conducting business as a precious metals dealer contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be, per se, grounds for suspension or revocation of an occupation tax certificate. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 26-305. - Background checks. 
All persons or businesses licensed by the city to deal in precious metals ("dealer") shall perform criminal background checks on all employees hired after the date of passage of the ordinance. The dealer shall maintain such background check records for a minimum period of at least five years after an employee leaves the dealer's employ. The dealer shall provide all information relevant to the criminal background checks on all new employees to the Sandy Springs Police Department within 30 days of the date of hire of said employee. 
( Ord. No. 2017-06-10 , 6-6-2017) 
Secs. 26-306—26-319. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MOBILE FOOD UNITS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-10-22 , § I, adopted Oct. 17, 2017, enacted provisions designated as Art. IX, §§ 26-300—26-304. In order to avoid duplication of article and section numbering, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. X, §§ 26-320—26-325, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 26-320. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ice cream vending unit means a motor vehicle containing a commercial freezer from which a vendor sells or gives away frozen food products such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, flavored frozen water, and similar desserts, whether prepackaged, prepared, or prepared on-site. Such frozen food products are typically sold on city streets at intermittent locations. 
Mobile food unit means a food and beverage establishment that is a vehicle mounted unit, either motorized or trailered. and readily movable, without disassembling, for transport to another location. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10-22 , § I, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 26-321. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to mobile food units engaged in the business of preparing, cooking and distributing food prepared on-site with or without charge from mobile food units on or in city owned or private property within the City of Sandy Springs, and any individual engaged in the operation of a mobile food unit. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to an ice cream vending unit so long as the unit is stationary in the same location for no more than 15 minutes at a time. An ice cream vending unit may sell or attempt to sell any item on from an ice cream vending unit only on streets where the speed limit is 30 miles per hour or less. An ice cream vending unit shall not stop within 20 feet of an intersection or double park when attempting or making a sale. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10-22 , § I, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 26-322. - Mobile food unit permit. 
(a)  No mobile food unit may be operated on city owned or private property without the mobile food unit owner or his/her designee having first been issued a permit pursuant to this section. Mobile food units are only allowed in commercial, mixed use or perimeter zoned properties. 
(b)  A permit allows the permittee to operate at up to five different properties. An applicant may apply for more than one permit. 
(c)  Applicants for a permit authorizing a mobile food unit to operate on private property must provide: 
(1)  A city business license. 
(2)  A valid health permit from the Georgia Department of Public Health stating the mobile food unit meets all applicable standards. A valid health permit must be maintained for the duration of the provisional use permit. 
(3)  Written permission from the owner(s) of the private properties upon which the permittee will operate. 
(4)  A sketch to be approved by the director of community development for each property. Illustrating access to the site, all parking areas, routes for ingress and egress, placement of the mobile food unit, distance from property lines, garbage receptacles and any other feature associated with the mobile food unit. 
(d)  A mobile food unit permit is valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10-22 , § I, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 26-323. - Placement and operation of mobile food units. 
(a)  A mobile food unit operator shall not: 
(1)  Sell anything other than food and non-alcoholic beverages and items incidental to the product and its consumption: 
(2)  Set up more than one covered ten by ten table to provide condiments to patrons; 
(3)  Play any music, sound effect or noise that is audible outside of the vehicle; 
(4)  Place or utilize any signage that is not permanently affixed to the mobile food unit; 
(5)  Fail to provide receptacles and properly dispose of all trash, refuse, compost and garbage that is generated by the use; 
(6)  Cause any liquid wastes to be discharged from the mobile food unit; 
(7)  Locate a mobile food unit within 100 feet of a single-family or two-family residential use as measured from its property line or on the same property as an existing restaurant unless the owner of that restaurant owns the mobile food unit. 
(b)  The following are requirements for the City of Sandy Springs Fire Department. Each mobile food unit shall be checked for compliance at licensing and may be inspected annually. 
(1)  A fire extinguishing system designed for cooking operations shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 17A and UL 300 to cover cooking equipment which requires a mechanical exhaust ventilation system. The extinguishing system shall be serviced and tagged by a state licensed fire extinguisher business every six months. 
(2)  Mechanical exhaust ventilation system equipment shall be provided over all cooking equipment as required to affectively remove cooking odors, smoke, steam, grease, heat and vapors. 
(3)  All mechanical exhaust ventilation equipment shall be commercial and installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 96 120-3-3 and any adopted local fire and/or building codes. 
(4)  A fire extinguisher is required for protecting Class ABC hazards and shall have at least one 2A20BC extinguisher mounted in an accessible location. The ABC extinguisher shall be serviced and tagged by a state licensed fire extinguisher business every 12 months or within two months of an application for an annual permit. 
(5)  A fire extinguisher is required for combating grease fires and shall have at least one K-Class fire extinguisher mounted in an accessible location. The K-Class extinguisher shall be serviced and tagged by a state licensed fire extinguisher business every 12 months or within two months of an application for an annual permit. 
(6)  "NO SMOKING" signs shall be posted. 
(7)  If a flammable gas tank in used inside the vehicle, there must be at least two ventilation openings venting to the outside. One located near the cylinder valve and one must be located at floor level. 
(8)  Tanks must be properly secured to a rigid structure. 
(9)  All supply hose for the tank shall be rubber, located off the floor, protected from physical damage and stamped "APPROVED FOR LP GAS" or "APPROVED FOR NATURAL GAS". 
(10)  The main shut off for gas must be marked. 
(11)  Extension cords shall not be substituted for permanent wiring. Extension cords shall be used only with portable appliances. 
(12)  Ground fault circuit-interrupter protection shall be provided for receptacles located near sink or water basin 
( Ord. No. 2017-10-22 , § I, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 26-324. - Revocation. 
A permit may be revoked by the zoning administrator at any time, due to the failure of the permit holder to comply with any requirements of this chapter. Notice of revocation shall be made in writing to the permit holder. Any person aggrieved by such notice may appeal the revocation to the board of appeals. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10-22 , § I, 10-17-2017) 
Secs. 26-325—26-339. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PET SHOPS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11-23 , § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2017, enacted provisions designated as Art. IX, §§ 26-320—26-324. In order to avoid duplication of article and section numbering, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. XI, §§ 26-340—26-344, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 26-340. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except which the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal care facility means an animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality, whose mission and practice is the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations. 
Animal rescue organization means any not for profit organization which has tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes. 
Cat means a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus. 
Dog means a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris. 
Pet shop means a retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined. 
( Ord. No. 2017-11-23 , § 1, 11-21-2017) 
Sec. 26-341. - Restrictions on the sale of animals. 
(a)  A pet shop may not sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, or otherwise dispose of dogs or cats, but may offer for adoption only those dogs and cats that the pet shop has obtained from or displays in cooperation with: 
(1)  An animal care facility; or 
(2)  An animal rescue organization. 
(b)  A pet shop shall not offer for adoption a dog or cat that is younger than eight weeks old. 
( Ord. No. 2017-11-23 , § 1, 11-21-2017) 
Sec. 26-342. - Recordkeeping and disclosures. 
(a)  A pet shop shall maintain records sufficient to document the source of each dog or cat the pet shop acquires, for at least one year following the date of acquisition. Such records shall be made available immediately upon request by the city manager, the chief of police, or any authorized designee of these city officials. 
(b)  A pet shop that offers space for the adoption of dogs or cats shall post, in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure of each such animal, a sign listing the name of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization from which the pet shop acquired each dog or cat. 
( Ord. No. 2017-11-23 , § 1, 11-21-2017) 
Sec. 26-343. - Penalties. 
(a)  Each failure to post a sign for an individual dog or cat as required by this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Each dog or cat sold, exchanged, bartered, offered for sale, auctioned, delivered, or transferred in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense of up to $500.00 per violation. 
(c)  Each days failure to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2017-11-23 , § 1, 11-21-2017) 
Sec. 26-344. - Enforcement. 
City manager, the chief of police, or any authorized designee of these city officials shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement by means of court citations and are authorized to delegate enforcement authority to their designated employees. 
( Ord. No. 2017-11-23 , § 1, 11-21-2017) 
Secs. 26-345—26-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNITS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-02-06 , § I, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, enacted provisions designated as Art. X, §§ 26-321—26-323. In order to avoid duplication of article and section numbering, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. XII, §§ 26-371—26-373, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 26-371. - Short-term rental unit. 
For the purposes of this chapter, a short-term rental unit is defined as any non-subsidized house, apartment, condominium, room or lodging accommodation on any property within the city that is rented to the same tenant for a period of less than 30 days. A short-term rental unit shall be located inside or adjacent to its owner's occupied dwelling located on the same property. The definitions and regulations in this chapter shall be cumulative to those found in section 7.3.1(D) of the city's Development Code. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-06 , § I, 2-20-2018) 
Sec. 26-372. - Short-term rental unit permitted. 
(a)  Short-term rental units may only be operated in the city pursuant to this section. 
(b)  The owner, platform or manager operating a short-term rental unit shall hold a valid city business license. The business license number shall be included in any advertisement of the short-term rental unit. 
(c)  Each individual short-term rental unit shall be permitted with the city. Prior to issuance of a permit for a short-term rental unit, each property containing a short-term rental unit shall be inspected for compliance with all building and fire codes. A short-term rental unit permit is valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(d)  All parking for short-term rental units shall be accommodated on the same lot as the short-term rental unit. 
(e)  All owners or hosts shall post the city's noise ordinance in a visible location in the short-term rental unit. 
(f)  All owners, platforms and managers of multiple short-term rental units shall register and provide detailed records of rental activity and taxes by rental unit. 
(g)  All owners or hosts shall give notice of the operation of a short-term rental unit to all residential parcels and/or homeowner's association(s) immediately adjacent to the short-term rental unit. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-06 , § I, 2-20-2018; Ord. No. 2018-04-09 , § I, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 26-373. - Denial, suspension and revocation. 
(a)  A permit may be revoked by the city at any time, due to the failure of the permit holder to comply with any requirements of this chapter. Notice of revocation shall be made in writing to the permit holder. Any person aggrieved by such notice may appeal the revocation pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  An advertisement promoting the availability of property containing short-term rental units in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, and may be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a license. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-06 , § I, 2-20-2018) 
Chapter 30 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 4.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Created. 
The city hereby creates the municipal court of the city. The court has the powers and jurisdiction set forth in sections 4.01 and 4.04 of the city Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 1, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
Charter reference— Municipal court established, § 4.01. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court regarding traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21. 
Sec. 30-2. - Judges. 
(a)  In accordance with section 4.02 of the Charter, the council shall appoint the municipal court judges with compensation to be fixed by the council. Of the municipal court judges appointed by the council, the mayor shall appoint and the council shall approve a chief judge of the municipal court. Every two years, a new chief judge shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council from among the judges currently serving on the municipal court. A judge may be appointed to serve for two consecutive terms as chief judge. The chief judge shall perform all duties assigned to the chief judge by the Uniform Rules, Municipal Courts of the State of Georgia, as amended from time to time ("uniform rules"), in accordance with applicable provisions of the uniform rules. 
The chief judge shall take any and all such other actions as may be authorized for a chief judge of municipal court pursuant to the uniform rules, as may be approved by the council, and city ordinances. 
The chief judge shall serve as such at the pleasure of the mayor and the council. 
(b)  The municipal court judges shall serve a term of four years and may be reappointed to consecutive terms thereafter. 
(c)  The municipal court judges may only be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 4.02(d) of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 1, § 2), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2016-08-19 , 8-2-2016) 
Charter reference— Judges, § 4.02. 
State Law reference— Continuing education requirements for municipal judges, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-11, 36-32-27. 
Sec. 30-3. - Additional personnel. 
(a)  Clerk of the court. The city manager shall have the authority to hire or fire a municipal court clerk. 
(b)  Police. Officers of the city police department or the county police department or the county sheriff's department, or any other law enforcement officer, may execute warrants and other writs in furtherance of the court's jurisdiction and orders. 
(c)  Bailiff. At least one police department officer will serve as a bailiff whenever the municipal court is in session. 
(d)  Solicitor. In accordance with section 3.08 of the Charter, the city attorney may be the prosecuting officer or solicitor in the municipal court. The council may also, from time to time, appoint and contract with other attorneys who are members of the State Bar of Georgia to serve as a prosecuting attorney in municipal court. The compensation of said attorney shall be determined by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 1, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Continuing education requirements for municipal court clerks, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-13. 
Sec. 30-4. - Court sessions. 
The court shall be in session at least one day per month and other times as determined necessary by the clerk of court to keep the court dockets current. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 1, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
Charter reference— Convening municipal court, § 4.03 
State Law reference— Permissible location of municipal court sessions, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-12. 
Sec. 30-5. - Court fees. 
(a)  The municipal court judges may recommend a schedule of fees to assist the court in its operation and budget. The council must approve any such schedule, but if the council does not act within 30 days of the court's recommendation, the fee schedule will become effective. 
(b)  The council may set city fines for violations of city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 1, § 6), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 30-6. - Authority to enact rules and regulations. 
The municipal judges, by majority vote, shall have authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper for addressing the operations of the municipal court. The clerk of the court, as administrator of the court, shall prepare reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. All rules shall be subject to the approval of the council. Such rules shall be made available on the city website or by other means determined by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 2, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 30-7. - Contempt of court. 
The court may find persons in contempt of court and punish said persons in accordance with section 4.04 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 2, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
Charter reference— Authority to impose penalties for contempt of court, § 4.04. 
Sec. 30-8. - Fines. 
(a)  For fines that may be due by any defendant, execution may be issued by the court clerk and collected as provided by law. The municipal court shall have the discretion to enter fines consistent with this Code, and state and federal law. 
(b)  Persons charged with traffic violations or other offenses as specified by the judge may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged. Those persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and other serious offenses, as determined by the municipal court judge, shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 2, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Charter reference— Authority to impose penalties, § 1.03(b)(27). 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal court to impose penalties, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1(c), 36-32-5; traffic violations, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-9. - Sentences. 
In addition to any applicable fines, and upon a judgment or plea of guilty or pretrial diversion, the municipal court judge may impose sentence of confinement, compulsory work, or both; commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; place the defendant on probation; or defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. The court may punish for violations within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both; except as otherwise provided by this Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 2, § 4), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2006-01-05, § 1(ch. 4, art. 2, § 4), 1-3-2006) 
Charter reference— Authority to impose penalties, § 1.03(b)(27). 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal court to impose jail terms, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; authority of municipal court to impose penalties, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1(c) and 36-32-5. 
Sec. 30-10. - Appeals. 
Unless specified elsewhere in the Code or Charter, all appeals from decisions of the municipal court shall be appealable, by right of certiorari, to the superior court of the county under the laws of the state regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 2, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
Charter reference— Certiorari, § 4.05. 
State Law reference— Certiorari, O.C.G.A. § 5-7-3. 
Secs. 30-11—30-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BAIL 

Sec. 30-37. - General provisions. 
Bail and bond considerations must be consistent with section 4.04(c) of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 3, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 30-38. - Minor traffic offenses. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11, any person cited for a traffic offense shall be released in lieu of bail upon showing his or her driver's license. This provision does not apply to any charge of driving under the influence or other serious offenses designated by the municipal judge. 
(b)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 3, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Display of driver's license in lieu of bail, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11 et seq. 
Sec. 30-39. - Professional bondsmen. 
No professional bondsman shall be accepted as surety on a bail bond unless he holds a current business license in the city, is approved by the chief of police, and has fully complied with all other city requirements for bonding companies. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 3, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 30-40. - Failure or refusal to give bond. 
If the accused or a witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required under this article, the person so failing or refusing may be confined or kept under guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-08, § 1(ch. 4, art. 3, § 4), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 30-41. - Bond forfeitures and disposition of unclaimed bond forfeitures. 
(a)  Any party, defendant, accused, or other person required or permitted by law to give or post bond (or bail) as surety or security for the happening of any event or act in criminal matters or ordinance violation may discharge the requirement by depositing cash in the amount of the bond so required with the appropriate person, official or other depository. 
(b)  Any official or other person receiving such bond shall give a receipt therefor and shall cause the fact of the receipt to be entered and recorded on the docket of the case in which it was given. If bond is given in a matter not appearing as a separate court case on a docket, a docket shall be prepared, maintained and kept of all such transactions and the name and address of the person giving or making the bond, the date of the receipt of the bond, the name of the person receiving the bond, the amount of the bond and a description of the cause for giving the bond, together with any and all other information desirable concerning the bond, shall be a part of the record in that separate docket. 
(c)  In the event that any cash bail posted pursuant to this Code section is not later claimed by the surety on such bond after a period of one year from the later of either the date on which the defendant was required to appear in court or the date of the disposition of the case by the prosecutor or the court, including any appeal or a verdict or sentence, then the cash shall be paid into the general fund of the city, as in the case of forfeited bonds, provided that the officer who accepted such cash bail shall first have notified the surety, by mailing notice to such surety at the last address given by such surety. If no address is known or found, then said notice shall be given by publishing notice in the legal organ and by placing notice on the website of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, at least 30 days prior to transfer of said funds to the general fund of the city. The notice shall state that such funds shall be forfeited if they are not claimed within 30 days following the date of mailing or publication of such notice. Any claim by a surety for refund of a cash bond shall include acceptable documentary proof of disposition of the case from the prosecuting official or appropriate court records or such other documentation as may be acceptable to the official holding such cash bail as proof that the case has been settled. 
( Ord. No. 2017-09-20 , § 1, 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 30-42—30-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COURT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 30-69. - Summons—Issuance. 
Any member of the department of police, the solicitor of the municipal court and the assistant solicitor, in all cases where a complaint is made or information is obtained of any violation of this Code or other laws or ordinances of the city, shall issue a summons, directed to the accused, requiring the accused to appear before the municipal court to answer this charge. The summons shall designate the time and place of trial and shall be signed by the member of the department of police, the solicitor or assistant solicitor issuing it and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving the copy at the place of residence of the accused. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-05, § 1(ch. 4, art. 4, § 1), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-70. - Same—Failure to appear. 
It shall be unlawful for any defendant lawfully summoned to answer charges in the municipal court to either fail, neglect or refuse to appear at the time and place specified in the summons or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence. Failure to appear in municipal court for any noticed appearance may be cause for the court to continue the case until such time as the court shall direct, and the court may issue an order requiring the police chief, or other members of the department of police, to arrest the defendant and bring the defendant before the court to answer both the initial charges and the charge for failing to appear. The chief of corrections shall keep the defendant in custody until the defendant is brought before the court, unless the defendant posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. Nothing herein stated shall be construed to abridge the right of the solicitor to bring an action against the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-05, § 1(ch. 4, art. 4, § 2), 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 2014-11-38 , 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 30-71. - Subpoenas—Issuance. 
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the clerk of the municipal court shall issue a subpoena directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall be served as other process by the police chief or other police officers. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-05, § 1(ch. 4, art. 4, § 3), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-72. - Same—Failing or refusing to obey. 
If any person lawfully summoned as a witness before the municipal court shall either fail, neglect or refuse to attend the trial for which the person has been summoned or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence, the person may be cited for contempt and be fined in a sum not to exceed $200.00. If the cause is continued because of the absence of this person, the court may issue attachment against the person requiring the person to show cause on the day appointed for trial why the person should not be cited for contempt. The police chief or other police officer shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest the person and keep the person in custody until the person is brought before the court, unless the person posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-05, § 1(ch. 4, art. 4, § 4), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-73. - Contempt. 
Any person who, during a sitting of the municipal court, shall be guilty of a contempt of court or who refuses to abide by an order of the court or sentence may be punished as provided in state law for contempt against the superior courts of this state. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-05, § 1(ch. 4, art. 4, § 5), 1-3-2006) 
State Law reference— Municipal court judges to have powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; contempt powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-2(7). 
Chapter 34 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to define and abate nuisances, § 1.03(b)(22). 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 34-18. - Offense; penalty. 
(a)  It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent, or tenant to maintain a nuisance. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. Following five days after receipt of certified written notice to the property owner, agent, or tenant, a citation may be issued by the city. 
(b)  Penalties for the first violation of this section shall be a minimum fine of $100.00. The penalty for second violations of the same provisions of this section by the same owner or tenant shall be a minimum fine of $500.00. Third or repeat violations of the same provisions of this section by the same owner or tenant shall be a minimum fine of $1,000.00. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specified, no penalty issued for a violation of this article shall be inconsistent with the provisions set forth in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 3. § 6), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 34-19. - Conditions harmful to health. 
(a)  The following conditions being maintained or located on an owner's property may be declared to be nuisances when any one of them endangers the health, welfare, or good of other persons or the good order of the community: 
(1)  Stagnant water on the premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation, or any fruit, vegetable, animal, or rodent, upon the premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system that would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway, or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to reasonable people including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent the activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators, and the like, unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law or this Code. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to be the exclusive definition of nuisance within this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 3, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Nuisance defined, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 34-20. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any official of the city or otherwise authorized person may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city police department, or the city manager or his designee. Any complaint of nuisance shall be investigated by the police department and may be placed on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. 
(b)  The municipal court, after five days' notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon, and, upon finding that a nuisance does exist, shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(c)  County animal control officers or city building and license inspectors may also receive complaints, investigate the same, and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 3, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Filing of complaint to abate public nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-2; authority of municipal court to order abatement of nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 34-21. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent, or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent, or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the municipal court judge, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. 
(b)  The chief of police, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating same and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent, or tenant for collection as for city revenues generally and shall become a lien on the property of such persons. 
(c)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 3, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 34-22. - Summary abatement; nuisance per se and emergency conditions. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipal court judge from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 3, § 4), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Secs. 34-23—34-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS, UNSAFE OR UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Unsafe building ordinances, § 3.01(b)(26). 
State Law reference— Unsafe building ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 34-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.), as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.); and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.), after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.). 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. The term "interested parties" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of the council, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8, and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-87, § 1(ch. 15, art. III, § 3.0), 11-21-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 31-2-8. 
Sec. 34-49. - Findings. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that, within the city limits, there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city; or general nuisance law in which constitutes a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city, where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings oar structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A § 41-2-9(b) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-87, § 1(ch. 15, art. III, § 1), 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 34-50. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-87, § 1(ch. 15, art. III, § 2), 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 34-51. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthy. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint or designate the city code enforcement officer, city fire marshal, city fire chief, city police chief, building inspector, and their designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days or more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property; 
(3)  For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented; or 
(4)  Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(h)  The lien provided for in subsection (g) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of this filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A title 48, ch. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.); provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. 
(i)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(l)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(m)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-87, § 1(ch. 15, art. III, § 4.0), 11-21-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 34-52. - Determination under existing ordinances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure, or the occupants of a neighborhood dwelling, building, or structure, or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards, which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-87, § 1(ch. 15, art. III, § 5.0), 11-21-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-10. 
Sec. 34-53. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officer, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-87, § 1(ch. 15, art. III, § 6.0), 11-21-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 34-54. - Service of complaints and other filings. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. 
(2)  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(b)  Notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11-87, § 1(ch. 15, art. III, § 7.0), 11-21-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Penalties. 
Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
Sec. 38-2. - False representations to police or any city department. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and willfully and with intent thereby to mislead, either in such person's own behalf or in behalf of others, as principal or as agent, to make or file orally or in writing any false representations of fact to any police officer of the city or to any department of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 5, § 8), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— False statements and writings; concealment of facts, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. 
Sec. 38-3. - Criminal impersonation. 
(a)  In this section, "intent to defraud" means the use of deception with the intention to injure another's interest which has economic value. 
(b)  A person is guilty of a violation of this Code if such person: 
(1)  Assumes a false identity and does not act in such person's assumed character with the intent to defraud another; or 
(2)  Pretends to be a representative of some person or organization and does an act in such person's pretended capacity with the intent to defraud another. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-06, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 2(c)), 2-6-2007) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-3. 
Secs. 38-4—38-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 38-23. - Vandalism. 
(a)  Public property. It is unlawful for any person to vandalize, deface, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any public property or park in the city. 
(b)  Private property. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to vandalize, deface, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any private property without the consent of the owner. 
(2)  This subsection shall not be construed as affecting any remedy the private property owner may have at law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 4), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 38-24. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Property owner responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or for repair or maintenance of in the city to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period in excess of ten days. The city may provide notice of defacement to such owner or responsible person by first class mail or personal service; provided that failure to receive notice shall not alleviate the person's responsibility for removal of the graffiti. Notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The street address and/or description of the property sufficient for identification of the property; 
(2)  A description of the graffiti with notice to remove same, and notice that the property owner shall, if the graffiti is not removed within ten days after receipt of the notice, be cited for violation of this section. 
(b)  Exceptions to property owner responsibility. The removal requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply if the property owner or responsible party can demonstrate that: 
(1)  The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or 
(2)  The property owner or responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of 30 days after defacement. 
(c)  Citation of owner, right of city to remove graffiti. Whenever the owner or person responsible for control or maintenance of private property fails or refuses to remove the graffiti after notice by the city to do so, such owner or responsible person shall be cited for violation of this section. The city may, upon the owner's or responsible person's failure to act, take any necessary action to remove, repaint, or repair the graffiti-damaged property and may use public funds for such action, the cost of which shall be a lien on the property served. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to undertake such repair, repainting or removal. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Graffiti shall have that meaning ascribed to it in O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2. 
Graffiti implement or paraphernalia means any substance or material such as, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, permanent ink markers, paint sticks, and etchers; also including, but not limited to, tips or nozzles which can be applied to aerosol paint containers. 
(e)  Unlawful possession on public or private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement or paraphernalia while in, on, at or about any private property without the owner or occupant's permission or any public property including, but not limited to, public parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreation facilities, schools, school district facilities, libraries, courthouses, utility stations, storm drains or any other publicly owned, operated and/or maintained facility. This subsection shall not apply to persons located on public sidewalks or streets during each daily period from sunrise to sunset. This subsection shall not apply to any officer, employee or agent of the public entity that owns the public property acting within the scope of their employment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21; local programs for removal of graffiti, O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-4(b). 
Sec. 38-25. - Tampering with utilities. 
It is unlawful for any person to disturb, tamper with, or remove any guy wires from any electric power pole, utility pole, or telephone pole located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 6), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring, or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities, or political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 38-26. - Entering automobile. 
It shall be unlawful to enter any automobile or other motor vehicle with the intent to commit a theft or a felony therein. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-12, § 1, 4-1-2008) 
Secs. 38-27—38-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE, ORDER AND SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-54. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life limb or health; 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of gaming; 
(5)  Be in or about any place, alone or with others, with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing' or to aid or abet any person doing so; 
(6)  Be in or about any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs are practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcohol; 
(7)  Direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(8)  Interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(9)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; 
(10)  Stand or remain in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass, or public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(11)  Disrupt by actions which tend to cause an immediate breach of the peace the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital, or home for the elderly; or 
(12)  Throw bottles, paper, cans, glass sticks, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 38-55. - Panhandling. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive panhandling means and includes: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person or his vehicle in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to section 38-82 (b)(4) of this chapter shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or words intended to, or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access including, but not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(b)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation to aggressively panhandle within any public area in the city or panhandle or solicit funds for the sole benefit of the solicitor: 
(1)  In any public transportation vehicle, or bus or subway station or stop; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business or within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(3)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
(4)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(c)  Applicability. This article regulates the time, place and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons from exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 10, §§ 1—3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-56. - Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon the property in his immediate possession. 
Ask, beg or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage or the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede demands. 
(b)  Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner set forth in subsection (d) of this section, or in any of the locations set forth in subsection (c)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)  Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxi stand; 
(4)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; 
(5)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(d)  Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by accosting another or by forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(e)  Who may press charges. Persons who may press charges under this section include not only the victim of the prohibited solicitation, but also any person who witnesses such conduct including, but not limited to, police officers, security officers, hotel personnel, and bystanders. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 5, § 4), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-57. - Street solicitations prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access including, but not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale or purchase of goods or services. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization or corporation to solicit within any public right-of-way in the city. 
(c)  This section regulates the time, place, and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 9, §§ 1—3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-58. - Public urination or defecation. 
It shall be unlawful to defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the halls or elevator of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-06, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 2(e)), 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 38-59. - Spitting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon sidewalks, or upon the floors of places of worship, buses, public halls, theaters or other public places. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-06, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 2(f)), 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 38-60. - Urban camping prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Camp means residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any substantial prolonged period of time; regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
Public park means all municipal parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments. 
Public street means all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. This subsection does not apply to parks as defined in section 42-1. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public street. 
(d)  Other public property; blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section until he or she has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he or she is subject to arrest for urban camping. 
(f)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons in wheelchairs sitting on sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children sleeping while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 4, § 4), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-61. - Residential picketing. 
(a)  The term "picket" or "picketing" shall refer to the following types of activity: 
(1)  Patrolling or stationing oneself at a residence, bearing some insignia or sign designed to persuade or protest; 
(2)  Staging a public or private protest of any kind; 
(3)  Obstructing passage to or from a residence; or 
(4)  Promoting a strike or a boycott at an individual residence. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to picket or engage in picketing upon, before or about the private residence or home of any individual. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 5, § 7), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-62. - Hospitals and doctors to make certain reports to police. 
All hospitals, doctors and pharmacists in the city shall immediately report to the police department, the name and nature of the case of any person brought under its or his care who is suffering from wounds of any description, inflicted by a firearm, knife or other weapon or instrument; any unidentified person; and any person who is the victim of an accident or who might come under its or his care and whose case is of a suspicious nature. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-40, § 2(ch. 15, art. 2, § 1.7), 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 38-63. - Loitering and prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the persona an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-12, § 2, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 38-64. - Consumer fireworks—Restrictions. 
The use or ignition of consumer fireworks shall only be permitted during the following times: 
(1)  On any day beginning at the time of 10:00 a.m. and up to and including the ending time of 11:59 p.m., subject to the provisions of chapter 38, article III, division 2 of the Sandy Springs Municipal Code and except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) below; 
(2)  On January 1, the last Saturday and Sunday in May, July 3, July 4, the first Monday in September and December 31 beginning at the time of 10:00 a.m. and up to and including the ending time of 11:59 p.m.; and 
(3)  On January 1 of each year beginning at the time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the ending time of 1:00 a.m. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08-27 , 8-16-2016; Ord. No. 2018-07-22 , § I, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 38-65. - Fencing material restricted. 
No person may construct, erect, or maintain any electric or electrified fence, or any fence constructed of barbed wire or concertina wire, or any fence consisting solely of horizontal metal wires within the city limits. 
( Ord. No. 2019-01-05 , § I, 1-15-2019) 
Secs. 38-66—38-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, adopted Aug. 7, 2018, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 38-81—38-93, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2018-02-07 , § I, adopted Feb. 20, 2018. 

Sec. 38-81. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety, and the quality of life, and a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated, and the people have a right to, and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound. 
(b)  In order to ensure attractive residential and commercial areas, it is necessary that an audibly satisfying environment be maintained. It is the policy of the mayor and council to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or degrade the quality of life. The city is more likely to attract permanent residents and commercial enterprises if it controls and maintains appropriate noise quality, and the residents will ultimately gain financial improvements and protection in their quality of life as a result of these regulations. 
(c)  This division shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources within the limits of the city. 
(d)  No provisions of this chapter shall apply to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated as dB(A) or dBA. 
Commercial District means, for the purposes of this chapter, any parcel of land in an area zoned for commercial use, consisting of public streets, public sidewalks and pedestrian walkways, public open spaces, outdoor cafe areas operated under any permit granted by the city, public or privately-owned alleys and any privately-owned outdoor property that is open to the public for commercial or recreational purposes. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
Instrument, machine or device means and refers to any musical instrument, radio, phonograph, compact disc player, cassette tape player, amplifier or any other machine or device for producing, reproducing or amplification of sound. 
Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce means any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
Motorcycle means any motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and any four-wheeled vehicle weighing less than 500 pounds and equipped with an engine of less than six horsepower, excepting farm tractors. 
Motor vehicle means any self-propelled device or device designed for self-propulsion, upon or by which any person or property is or may be drawn or transported upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary wheels or tracks. 
Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned, leased or otherwise legally controlled by one person from that owned, leased or otherwise legally controlled by another person, including intra-building real property divisions. 
Residential zone means any location within a protected or urban neighborhood as set forth in the City of Sandy Springs Development Code. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Sound generation means any conduct, activity or operation, whether human, mechanical, electronic or other, and whether continuous, intermittent or sporadic, and whether stationary or ambulatory in nature, which produces or results in an audible sound. 
Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and the A-frequency weighting network, as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters. 
Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-83. - Enforcement officers. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall be enforced by the code enforcement officers and/or the police officers of the city. 
(b)  The director of the department of community development, or his/her designee, and the chief of police, or his/her designee, shall have the power to: 
(1)  Coordinate the noise control activities of all municipal departments and cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies to the extent practicable; 
(2)  Review the actions of other municipal departments and advise such departments to the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control; 
(3)  Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this division; and 
(4)  Grant permits for variances according to the provisions of section 38-86. 
(c)  A code enforcement officer or police officer shall be qualified to enforce the provisions of this division if he/she has satisfactorily completed any of the following: 
(1)  An instructional program in community noise from a certified noise control engineer, as evidenced by certification from the Institute of Noise Control Engineering (INCE); 
(2)  An instructional program in community noise from another qualified code enforcement officer or police officer; or 
(3)  Education or experience or a combination thereof certified by the director of the department of community development or the chief of police as equivalent to the provisions of subsections (c)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(d)  Noise measurements taken by a code enforcement officer or police officer shall be taken in accordance with the procedures specified in this division and as promulgated by the chief of police pursuant to section 38-86 herein. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-84. - Duties and responsibilities of other departments. 
(a)  All departments and agencies of the municipality shall carry out their programs according to law and shall cooperate with the director of the department of community development and the chief of police in the implementation and enforcement of this division. 
(b)  All departments charged with new projects or changes to existing projects that may result in the production of noise shall consult with the director of the department of community development and the chief of police, prior to the approval of such projects, to ensure that such activities comply with the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-85. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Upon occurrence of a violation of this division, code enforcement officers or police officers having jurisdiction in the area where the violation takes place may issue a citation or summons for the violation returnable to the municipal court of the city. 
(b)  In lieu of issuing a citation or summons the director of the department of community development and chief of police may issue an order requiring abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this division within a reasonable time period and according to guidelines that the director or chief may prescribe. 
(c)  No provision of this division shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this division or from other law. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-86. - Testing of sound level meters. 
In order to implement and enforce this chapter effectively, the chief of police shall develop and promulgate standards and procedures for testing and validating sound level meters used in the enforcement of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-87. - Maximum sound levels in residential zones. 
(a)  Nighttime. No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level in a residential zone or within any residential building during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in excess of 55 dB(A) or ten dB(A) above ambient levels (whichever is more), when measured at or outside the property boundary. 
(b)  Daytime. No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level in a residential zone or within any residential building during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. in excess of 65 dB(A) or ten dB(A) above ambient levels (whichever is more), when measured at or outside the property boundary. 
(c)  Measurements in multifamily structures. In a structure used as a multifamily dwelling the police department may take measurements to determine sound levels from common areas within or outside the structure or from other dwelling units within the structure, when requested to do so by the owner or tenant in possession and control thereof. Such measurement shall be taken at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with doors to the receiving area closed and windows in the normal position for the season. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following activities or sources of noise shall be exempt from the daytime prohibition set forth in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Band performances or practices, athletic contests or practices and other school-sponsored activities on the grounds of public or private schools. 
(2)  Athletic contests and other officially sanctioned activities in city parks. 
(3)  Activities related to the construction, repair, maintenance, remodeling or demolition, grading or other improvement of real property, except as further regulated pursuant to section 38-93(a), below. 
(4)  Gardening, lawn care, tree maintenance or removal and other landscaping activities, except that all professional landscaping companies are further regulated pursuant to section 38-93(b), below. 
(5)  Church bells or carillons. 
(6)  Religious or political gatherings and other activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(7)  Activities for which the regulation of noise has been preempted by state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-88. - Motor vehicle maximum sound levels; amplified sound from vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle, when measured at a distance of 50 feet or more, exceeds the level set forth in the following table: 

 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section or provisions of this chapter related to noise, it shall be unlawful for any person to play or operate or permit the playing, use or operation of any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound, which is located within a motor vehicle being operated or parked on public or private property within the city, including any public or private street or alley, in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of passersby or other persons outside of the subject motor vehicle. The operation of any such machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be audible to the human ear at a distance of 100 or more feet from the vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. Such acts for purposes of this subsection are hereby found to be the creation of unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the city. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles driven in a duly authorized parade, nor to motor vehicle alarms or other security devices. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-89. - Sound levels; commercial/mixed use district. 
(a)  In any commercial/mixed use district, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or continue any sound generation in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb the comfort, health, peace, quiet, safety, or welfare of others. 
(b)  The use or operation of any instrument, machine, device or human voice between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:59 p.m. in such a manner to cause a sound generation in excess of 80 db(A) or ten db(A) above ambient levels (whichever is more), when measured at or beyond the property boundary at a distance of ten feet or more from the source of the sound generation shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The use or operation of any instrument, machine, device or human voice between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. in such a manner to cause a sound generation in excess of 60 db(A) or ten db(A) above ambient levels (whichever is more), when measured at or beyond the property boundary at a distance of ten feet or more from the source of the sound generation shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (a) above. 
(d)  The prohibitions set forth within this section shall not apply to any sound generation which occurs: 
(1)  As part of a city sponsored event; or 
(2)  From public and private transportation, refuse collection and sanitation services. 
(e)  Sound generation from a special event, conducted in accordance with a valid permit issued by the city in accordance with the city's special events regulations, shall be in compliance with the noise level and sound amplification requirements set forth in the permit for that special event, in lieu of the prohibitions set forth within this section. In the event that no sound amplification requirements are set forth in the permit for that special event, the prohibitions set forth in this section shall control. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-90. - Sound levels; public property. 
(a)  On any public property, including without limitation all public rights-of-way, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or continue any sound generation in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb the comfort, health, peace, quiet, safety, or welfare of others. 
(b)  The use or operation of any instrument, machine, device or human voice to cause a sound generation in excess of 75 db(A) when measured at a distance of ten feet or more from the source of the sound generation shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to motor vehicles and amplified sounds from motor vehicles, which are subject to the provisions of section 38-88 above. 
(d)  Sound generation from a special event, conducted in accordance with a valid permit issued by the city in accordance with the city's special events regulations, shall be in compliance with the noise level and sound amplification requirements set forth in the permit for that special event, in lieu of the prohibitions set forth within this section. In the event that no sound amplification requirements are set forth in the permit for that special event, the prohibitions set forth in this section shall control. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-91. - Sound level measurement. 
(a)  The decibel level of any noise regulated by this chapter may be measured by the use of a sound level meter which measures sound pressure levels. Such measurements shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the level of noise at issue in any court or legal proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The accuracy of the sound level meter may be tested by a calibrator. Any sworn report of the results of any test of the calibrator for the accuracy of a sound level meter shall be admissible in court in any criminal or civil proceeding, as evidence of the facts therein stated. 
(c)  An individual operating a sound level meter pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall issue a certificate to indicate: 
(1)  That the sound level meter used to take the decibel level reading was operated in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications; 
(2)  That the city has on file a sworn report which states that the sound level meter has been tested within the past 12 months and has been found to be accurate; 
(3)  The name of the accused; 
(4)  The location of the noise; 
(5)  The date and time that the reading was made; and 
(6)  The decibel level reading. 
Such certificate, when attested by the operator taking the decibel level reading, shall be admissible in court in any criminal or civil proceeding as evidence of the facts therein stated and of the decibel level reading. A copy of the certificate shall be delivered to the accused upon request. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-92. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances to the provisions contained in this division may be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours prior to the proposed operation or event, for consideration by the director of the department of community development and the chief of police. Such a request shall state the following: 
(1)  The reasons that a variance from the provisions of this division are needed; 
(2)  The impact that the denial of this request will have on the applicant's project or event and the surrounding properties; 
(3)  The steps which have been taken by the applicant to communicate those needs and impacts to owners of surrounding and nearby properties; 
(4)  The steps that have or will be taken to limit the impact of the proposed activity upon surrounding and nearby properties, activities and uses; 
(5)  The time at which the proposed activity that requires a variance will occur; and 
(6)  The duration of the proposed activity that requires a variance to the provisions of this division. 
(b)  No variance shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate proof that: 
(1)  Noise levels occurring during the period of the variance will not constitute a danger to public health; and 
(2)  Compliance with this division would impose an unreasonable hardship on the applicant; or 
(3)  Compliance with this division would prevent a benefit to the public equal to or greater than any detriment caused by noncompliance. 
(c)  In making the determination of granting a variance, the director of the department of community development and the chief of police shall consider the following: 
(1)  The character and potential or actual degree of injury to, or interference with, the health and welfare of the public or the reasonable use of adjoining properties; 
(2)  The social and economic value of the activity for which the variance is sought; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise control measures; 
(4)  The time and duration of the activity for which the variance is sought; and 
(5)  The location of the activity in relationship to adjoining properties, uses and activities. 
(d)  If the director of the department of community development and the chief of police find that the variance application adequately demonstrates the need for a variation from the provisions of this division and adequately provides for the amelioration of the impact upon surrounding and nearby properties, an administrative variance shall be granted allowing for one variation within one, 24-hour period. For commercial development, a second administrative variance may be granted for an additional 24-hour period upon demonstration of just cause and amelioration of impact upon surrounding and nearby properties. Thereafter, a residential or commercial applicant may request up to three additional variances to the provisions of this division by submission to the zoning board of appeals. 
(e)  The permit of variance may be revoked by the director of the department of community development and the chief of police if the terms of the permit of variance are violated. A variance may be revoked if there is a: 
(1)  Violation of one or more conditions of the variance; 
(2)  Material misrepresentation of fact in the variance application; or 
(3)  Material change in any of the circumstances relied on in granting the variance. 
(f)  Upon request of the applicant no less than 48 hours prior to the date granted for a variance, in the event of unforeseen circumstances, including without limitation forecast of inclement weather, which in the sole discretion of the director of the department of community development and the chief of police renders the approved date of the permit of variance unreasonable, impractical or impossible to carry out the stated purpose of the variance, the director of the department of community development and the chief of police shall have the authority to approve an alternative date for any permit of variance issued pursuant to this division. 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 38-93. - Construction or repair. 
(a)  Construction of any type, including, but not limited to, the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, stream or electric hoist, automatic nailers or staplers, or any similar equipment, shall be prohibited during the following times: Before 7:30 a.m. or after 7:30 p.m. on weekdays, and before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays, and at any time on Sundays and/or legal holidays (New Years' Day (as observed by the city), Memorial Day, Independence Day (as observed by the city), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day (as observed by the city)). Notwithstanding the foregoing, interior construction shall be permitted subject to the provisions of sections 38-87(a) and (b) or section 38-89 above, as applicable. 
(b)  Landscape contractors using any type of motorized mowers or mechanical blowers and other equipment which create noise exceeding 55 dB(A) when measured at or outside the property boundary shall be prohibited, during the following times: Before 7:30 a.m. or after 7:30 p.m. on weekdays, and before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays, and at any time on Sundays and/or legal holidays (New Years' Day (as observed by the city), Memorial Day, Independence Day (as observed by the city), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day (as observed by the city)). 
( Ord. No. 2018-08-25 , § I, 8-7-2018; Ord. No. 2018-09-29 , § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Secs. 38-94—38-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 38-118. - Prostitution and related offenses. 
(a)  House of ill fame. 
(1)  A person, having or exercising control over the use of any place or conveyance within the city which would offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution, commits the offense of keeping a place of prostitution when such person knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution; 1 
(2)  Those places or conveyances which have been adjudged to be places of prostitution, as provided in this chapter, may be abated as also provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Solicitation for an illicit sexual act. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in any place open to the public and whether as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, to offer or consent to perform any illicit sexual act for money or any other thing of value. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person, while in a place open to the public and whether as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, to attempt to induce, entice, solicit, pander, purchase or procure another to commit any illicit sexual act for money or other things of value. An illicit sexual act is defined as one or more of the following: 
a.  Prostitution. 
b.  Sodomy for hire. 
c.  Masturbation for hire. 
(2)  For purposes of subsection (b)(1) of this section, any person shall include solicitors of illicit sexual acts or panderers, who solicit, procure or purchase another to perform any illicit sexual act in exchange for money or other things of value, and who are commonly referred to as "johns" or "tricks." 
Any person engaging in violation of this section shall be guilty of the offense of idling and loitering for the purposes of committing an illicit sexual act. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-06, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 2(a), (b)), 2-6-2007) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-9 et seq. 
Sec. 38-119. - Public indecency. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts in a public place: An exposure of one's genitals, or of one's breasts, if female, except in a place designed for same. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-06, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 2(d)), 2-6-2007; Ord. No. 2009-04-24, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 38-120. - Obscenity and related offenses. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of distributing obscene material when the following occurs: 
(1)  He sells, rents, or leases to any person any obscene material of any description, knowing the obscene nature thereof, or offers to do so, or possesses such material with the intent to do so, provided that the word "knowing," as used in this section, shall be deemed to be either actual or constructive knowledge of the obscene contents of the subject matter. 
(2)  A person has constructive knowledge of the obscene contents if he has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on notice as to the suspect nature of the material. 
(3)  The character and reputation of the individual charged with an offense under this law, and the character and reputation of the business establishment involved may be placed in evidence by the defendant on the question of intent to violate this law. Undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates, and the like shall be deemed obscene notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make the obscenity patent or to disseminate it. 
(b)  Material is obscene if: 
(1)  To the average person applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion. 
(2)  The material, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(3)  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined as follows: 
a.  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
b.  Acts of masturbation; 
c.  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
d.  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
e.  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense under this section that selling, renting, or leasing the material was done for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational, legislative, judicial, or law enforcement purpose. 
(e)  A person who commits the offense of distributing obscene material shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-06, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 2(g)), 2-6-2007; Ord. No. 2009-04-24, § 2, 4-21-2009; Ord. No. 2017-03-05 , § I, 3-21-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq. 
Secs. 38-121—38-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ALCOHOL-RELATED OFFENSES 

Sec. 38-139. - Public possession or consumption. 
(a)  Alcohol consumption near package stores. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to consume all or any part of any type of alcoholic beverage within 100 feet of any retail store where alcoholic beverages are sold in package form or within the boundary lines of the property on which such retail store is located, whichever constitutes the greater distance. 
(b)  Drinking in public. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverage while on any streets, sidewalks, alleyways, parking areas or other open areas operated and controlled by the city, or while in or on the grounds of any MARTA station. This subsection does not apply to parks. 
(2)  Subsection (1) shall not apply to gatherings or activities for which a valid event permit has been issued by the city, subject to any conditions attached to the issuance of the permit. 
(3)  A licensee may prepare and serve alcoholic beverages to be consumed within an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of a sidewalk cafe. Open containers of alcoholic beverages shall only be transported into or out of outdoor dining areas by the licensee's working employees as part of their work duties. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 3(c)), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2009-03-17, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 38-140. - Public intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to be disorderly while under the influence on the streets, sidewalks or other public places. Any person who acts in a reckless manner so as to create an unreasonable risk to himself, to others or to property in the vicinity while under the influence of alcohol or drugs is in violation of this section. 
Sec. 38-141. - Furnishing, purchasing, or possession of alcoholic beverages by person less than 21 years of age. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No person directly or through another person shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person less than 21 years of age; 
(2)  No person less than 21 years of age shall purchase, drink or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  No person less than 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person less than 21 years of age; 
(5)  No person less than 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverages; or 
(6)  No person shall keep or maintain a place where persons less than 21 years of age are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(4) of this section shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  The sale, purchase or possession of alcohol beverages for consumption for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  The sale, purchase or possession of alcohol beverages for consumption at a religious ceremony; 
(3)  The possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person less than 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present; 
(4)  The sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. The term "proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(c)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person less than 21 years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishments; 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
(3)  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(d)  Testimony by any person under 21 years of age, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding against another person for violation of any provision of this section, shall not be used as an admission in any administrative or judicial proceedings brought against such testifying person less than 21 years of age. 
(e)  Any person convicted of violating any prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 180 days, or both; except that any person convicted of violating subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be punished by not more than 30 days imprisonment or a fine of not more than $300.00 or both. Any defendant charged under this section shall be entitled upon request to have the case against such defendant transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. Any person charged with a second or subsequent offense under this section shall be punished as for a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature in the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. 
(f)  Whenever any person who has not been previously convicted of any offense under this section or under any other law of the United States or any other state relating to alcoholic beverages pleads guilty to or is found guilty of a violation of subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of such person, may defer further proceedings and place such person on probation upon such reasonable terms and conditions as the court may require. 
(1)  The terms of probation shall preferably be such as to require the person to undergo a comprehensive rehabilitation program, including, if necessary, medical treatment, not to exceed three years, designed to acquaint such person with the ill effects of alcohol abuse and to provide such person with knowledge of the gains and benefits which can be achieved by being a good member of society. 
(2)  Upon violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed accordingly. 
(3)  Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge such person and dismiss the proceedings against such person. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection shall be without court adjudication of guilt and shall not be deemed a conviction for purposes of this subsection or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection may occur only once with respect to any person. 
(g)  Unless the officer has reasonable cause to believe such person is intoxicated, a law enforcement officer may arrest, by issuance of a citation, a person accused of violating only subsection (a)(2) of this section. The citation shall enumerate the specific charges against the person and either the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges or a notation that the person will be later notified of the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges. If the person charged shall fail to appear as required, the judge, having jurisdiction of the offense may issue a warrant or other order directing the apprehension of such person and commanding that such person be brought before the court to answer the charges contained within the citation and the charge of such person's failure to appear as required. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to invalidate an otherwise valid arrest by citation of a person who is intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 1, § 3(d)), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-23, 3-3-23.1, 3-3-24. 
Secs. 38-142—38-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING SCHOOLS 

Sec. 38-166. - Unauthorized persons entering school buildings. 
No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session, or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions, who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and been identified to the principal or the principal's agent and received written permission to remain on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 5, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-167. - Unauthorized persons not to remain in school buildings when requested to leave. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private or parochial school or on surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or designated agent. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 5, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-168. - Creating a disturbance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any private, public or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds or on the fields or grounds lawfully used for school activities while such recreational areas are in use or other activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-09, § 1(ch. 12, art. 5, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Secs. 38-169—38-180. - Reserved. 
Article VII. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 38-181. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the City of Sandy Springs of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the City of Sandy Springs and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-42, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 38-182. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all public and private property within the City of Sandy Springs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-42, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 28-183. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-42, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 38-184. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-42, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 38-185. - Definitions. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-42, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 38-186. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this City of Sandy Springs or any waters in this City of Sandy Springs unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
Construction site operators shall control waste at the construction site, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-42, § 1, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2014-08-20 , § 1, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 38-187. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-42, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 38-188. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Each and every day that the premises shall remain in a condition in violation of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall be in addition to the provisions of the abatement of said nuisance and the charge of the cost of the same against the owner of the premises by the city. A fine imposed under this code shall not exceed $1,000.00 per offense. A sentence of imprisonment under this article shall not exceed 60 days per offense. At the discretion of the Municipal Court judge, any sentence may be probated, altered or amended. Any property owner, occupant or party of interest who violates any other city code within a 24-month period shall immediately be issued a citation and subject to a fine of not less than $500.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city of Sandy Springs for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the City of Sandy Springs; and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-42, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Chapter 42 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal recreation generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Athletic field means areas within parks designed and used specifically for active play of a team game. 
Green space means open, undeveloped land, either in public or private ownership. Usually used in connection with property that has the potential of being developed for parks or other public usage. 
Greenway means a linear park, usually including a trail or series of trails. It generally has relative development. The greenway is often used as an attempt to preserve green space in a very urban area, such as under a power line easement. 
Indoor facility means any facility designed and utilized for indoor recreation activities. Includes community center, recreation center, aquatic facility, racquet courts, cultural arts center, performing arts center, arts and crafts center, museum, etc. 
Park means a publicly owned outdoor land set aside for the use of the public for recreation. Parks may be active, which include play fields, athletic fields, golf courses, and similar facilities designed for active play; and passive, which include picnic areas, arboretums, nature centers, flower gardens, waterfront areas with sitting areas, and similar types of facilities designed for gathering or for contemplation. A park must be of size or complexity to be used or visited. Simple landscaping, or a single piece of sculpture would not be considered a park without being part of a larger coordinated landscape area, or series of sculpture. The park is the backbone of any recreation and park system. 
Playground means an active area within a park consisting of equipment designed for children to use in an interactive play environment. 
Trail means a path or narrow transportation-oriented corridor for the primary purpose of biking, running, walking, or other nonmotorized use. It may be of impervious surface, such as asphalt, or may be left in its natural state, or may be composed of wood chips, cinders, or other types of natural material. Trails usually have a beginning and ending point and ideally have at least one such trailhead. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 1, § 1), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-2. - Department of recreation and parks. 
(a)  Created. There is hereby created a department of recreation and parks. 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose of the department to: 
(1)  Needs. Study and research the recreation and park needs of the citizens of the city, and create and manage a comprehensive recreation and park system of programs and facilities to meet those needs; 
(2)  Standards. Establish and promote recreation and parks standards; 
(3)  Management. Cooperate with state, federal, commercial and voluntary agencies in the management of the recreation and parks system; implement and support policies of the mayor, city council and city manager; and formulate day-to-day operating policies for the efficient administration of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 1, intro.), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-3. - Duties of recreation and parks director. 
The recreation and parks director shall: 
(1)  Implement and support the policies of the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Develop, direct, and implement the recreation and parks master plan at the direction of the city. 
(3)  Determine, prioritize, establish, conduct, construct, and maintain a recreation and parks system for the city that meets the leisure needs of the citizens, including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, trails, indoor recreation centers, programs, activities, and the maintenance and repair of such facilities as required. 
(4)  Recommend the setting aside, leasing, or acquisition of lands or buildings within the city limits for use as parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, or for other recreational purposes, and to provide for the maintenance and improvement of these areas. 
(5)  Determine and set a fees and charges schedule for all recreation programs, classes, events, and facility rentals and shall publish this schedule on an annual basis. 
(6)  Otherwise assist in the operation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 1, § 2), 2-20-2007) 
Charter reference— City authority to contract, § 1.03(b)(6); authority of city manager, § 3.04. 
Secs. 42-4—42-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 42-25. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all designated municipal public parks, which are defined for purposes of this article as any park, playground, green space, or place limits to which the general public has access and a right to frequent, for business, entertainment, or for other lawful purposes, and which has been either deeded to or dedicated to public use or ownership. Municipal public parks shall also include the sidewalks abutting any park, playground, or place above described. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 1), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-26. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this article and/or concealing a violation of, or harboring, assisting or protecting a person charged with or convicted of a violation of this article is shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, §§ 5(c), 6), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-27. - Additional rules. 
(a)  The director of recreation and parks shall have the authority to make and post rules and regulations as necessary to ensure the orderly management and administration of the recreation and parks department. 
(b)  Any organization that has a lease or user agreement with the city to manage a city-owned park or recreation facility shall devise and post those operating procedures and rules consistent with the facility which is under the lease agreement, and shall provide copies of those rules to the director of recreation and parks; provided that no posted procedure or rule may supersede any ordinance as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(jj), (kk)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-28. - Permitted park activities. 
(a)  Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity in city parks which requires a permit and/or a ticket without first obtaining such permit and/or ticket. 
(b)  The city manager may recommend a permit application procedure to the city council. 
(c)  The city manager shall establish guidelines regarding permitted uses of municipal parks. Such guidelines is designed to protect public safety, protect the parks, observe constitutional rights and promote the reasonable use of the parks. 
(d)  The recreation and parks director shall implement those guidelines. 
(e)  The city's recreation and parks department shall schedule the use of all city parks for organized activities, programs, assemblages, gatherings or games. 
(f)  No individual or group shall erect any booth or stand or sell any article within the limits of any city park without the written consent of the director of recreation and parks or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, §§ 3, 4(v)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-29. - Park hours. 
All city parks are closed, and no person is authorized to be on the premises or property of any city park, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., except authorized city employees or persons engaged in activities authorized by the city recreation board and recreation and parks director, or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(t)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-30. - Disobeying orders. 
No person shall disobey the lawful and reasonable order of a park employee, or employee contracted by the recreation and parks department for the purposes of safeguarding the park system in the discharge of his duties, or disobey or disregard the notices, prohibitions, instructions, rules or regulations on any park sign. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 5(b)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-31. - Unauthorized use. 
No person shall erect any structure, stand, or platform, run or conduct any race, or hold any athletic contest in any park or recreation area with the written agreement of the director of recreation and parks and without first securing all necessary permits. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(ff)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-32. - Obstruction. 
Interfering with, encumbering, obstructing or rendering dangerous any part of a park is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(s)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-33. - Concessions. 
Any concessionaire which through contractual agreement with the department operates any concession shall supply and provide the required permits for such operation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(d)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-34. - Selling. 
Flea markets, garage sales, rummage sales, and all other such sales by a person, persons, or organizations for either private or nonprofit purposes are prohibited in park and recreation areas. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(aa)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-35. - Soliciting. 
Engaging in or soliciting any businesses in a park area except in accordance with the provisions of a permit, contract, or other written agreement with the city recreation and parks department is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(ee)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-36. - Rental structures. 
Cultural, historical, recreation, park and special use structures may be reserved and rented based on the rental and reservation polices of each facility in place at the time of reservation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(z)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-37. - Construction. 
Construction of any building, structure, utility or any other entity upon, across, over, through, or under any park area, except in accordance with the provisions of a valid permit and contract and with the written approval of the recreation and parks director is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(e)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-38. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess and/or consume any alcoholic beverage, or be under the influence of any alcoholic, malt and/or vinous beverage, within any public park and/or within any building under the supervision of the city recreation and parks department unless such usage is expressly permitted by signage or published rules of the particular park or recreation building. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(a)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-39. - Animals. 
(a)  Horses. Horses and other equines are prohibited within any city parks. 
(b)  Killing wildlife. It is unlawful for any person to hunt, trap, shoot, maim or kill any animal or wildlife, or attempt to do any of the above to any animal or wildlife within any parks without the written permission of the city council. 
(c)  Pets. All pets must be on a leash, have current vaccination tags, and the owner is responsible for disposal of pet waste. All pets are prohibited on athletic fields, unless written permission for such has been authorized by the city manager or the director of recreation and parks. 
(d)  Exception. Service animals such as guide dogs for the blind may be allowed on athletic fields at any time while accompanying their owner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(i), (j), (l), (u)), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 2007-08-47, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 42-40. - Boats. 
Boat launching must be done within those boat lunching areas specifically built and designed for purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(c)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-41. - Firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any explosive substance (including fireworks) in any of the city parks, unless written permission for such has been authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within city parks unless expressly authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(g), (i)), 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 2008-02-06, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 2012-11-32, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 42-42. - Fires. 
The creation of any fire in any park outside a specifically designed picnic grill, fireplace or other similarly designed enclosure is prohibited without the written permission of the recreation and parks director. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(f)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-43. - Smoking and tobacco products prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to smoke any substance in a city park. It shall further be unlawful for any person to use any form of tobacco product in a city park. As used in this section, the term "tobacco product" means any product made or derived from tobacco that is intended for human use, including any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product. This includes, among other products, cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, e-cigarettes, cigars, roll-your-own tobacco, and smokeless tobacco. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06-13 , 6-3-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-06-13 , adopted June 3, 2014, repealed § 42-43 and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 42-43, pertained to underage smoking, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(dd)), adopted Feb. 20, 2007. 
Sec. 42-44. - Fireworks. 
It is unlawful for any individual to shoot, explode, or launch any fireworks in any park in the city, or into any park in the city from outside the park confines, unless such fireworks are part of a commercial fireworks display sponsored by the city and conducted by a licensed and bonded fireworks specialist. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(h)), 2-20-2007) 
State Law reference— Fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 42-45. - Meetings and assemblies. 
Persons, corporations, or organizations conducting public meetings, assemblies, worship services, entertainment, demonstrations, or political rallies, within the general confines of a park or municipal area without a permit issued by the city clerk, and without written permission of the director, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(n)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-46. - Motor vehicles and traffic; abandoned property. 
(a)  Vehicles in parks. Generally it is unlawful for any person to drive, operate, and/or park any motor vehicle, minibike, or motorcycle within any city park, except in areas designated for such use. This section does not apply to city employees when municipal duties require them to drive over said park and/or to park their vehicles or equipment in order to perform city business. All operators of motorcycles, trail bikes, off-road vehicles and other motorized vehicles must conform to the same rules and regulations as those of any other motor vehicle. No person shall grease, lubricate, or make repairs to any vehicle, except those of a minor nature, and then only in case of emergency. 
(b)  Abandonment. Leaving any vehicle or other personal property for longer than 24 hours, without prior permission of the recreation and parks director, is prohibited and any property so left is impounded. In the event unattended property interferes with a safe and orderly management of the park area, it may be impounded immediately. 
(c)  Speed limit. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized vehicle upon any road within a park in the city at a greater speed than 15 miles per hour. 
(d)  Skateboards. It is unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard on any street, lane, way, road, sidewalk, and/or any parking lot in any park in the city unless otherwise designated by signage or published rules. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(n), (o), (bb), (ff)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-47. - Natural products. 
The gathering or collecting of natural products of a renewable living resource such as plant material for personal use or for commercial sale is prohibited. The destroying, digging, cutting, removing, or possession of any tree, shrub, or other plant is prohibited without a permit granted by the recreation and parks director. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(p)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-48. - Noise. 
(a)  Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to make any loud noises that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities, engage in noisy disputes or conversation, that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities engage in any loud acts of behavior that would disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities, or in any other manner disturb the public peace, quiet, and order in any of the city parks. 
(b)  Public address system. The operation or use of public address systems, whether fixed, portable, or vehicle-mounted, is prohibited except when such use or operation is in connection with public gatherings or special events which have been approved by the recreation and parks director. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(r), (y)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-49. - Polluting water in parks. 
It is unlawful for any person to pollute or disturb any spring, branch, pond, fountain, or other water owned by or leased to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(w)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-50. - Posting signs; disposal of trash and refuse. 
It is unlawful for any person to affix any bill, sign, or notice on any tree, building, or fixture in any of the parks. It is unlawful for any person to place any paper, books, refuse, or trash of any kind in any of the public parks, except in containers provided for such. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(x)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-51. - Swimming in lakes or ponds. 
It is unlawful for any person to swim in or enter any lake or pond at any park in the city for the purpose of swimming or wading unless a permit for such has been issued by the city recreation and parks department or an authorized representative, or such person or persons are conducting recreation and parks department business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(gg)), 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 42-52. - Urban camping. 
It is unlawful to reside or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. Furthermore, it is unlawful to use any public place, including city parks, for living accommodation purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-16, § 1(ch. 8, art. 2, § 4(ii)), 2-20-2007) 
Secs. 42-53—42-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL USE POLICY 

Sec. 42-91. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply to all of the city's parks and park facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-41, ch. 8, art. 4, § 1, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 42-92. - Prohibition of independent commercial activities at parks and park facilities. 
(a)  Only commercial activities which are authorized or controlled by concession or contract or are part of any city-sponsored program shall be allowed in the city's parks and park facilities. 
(b)  Except as may be authorized under subsection (a) of this section, there shall be no independent commercial activity undertaken at any city park or park facility by any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group, organization, or combination acting as a unit. 
(c)  Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07-41, ch. 8, art. 4, § 2, 7-17-2007) 
Chapter 46 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for solid waste disposal, § 1.03(a)(35). 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION CONTRACTS 

Sec. 46-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved container, approved bag, container or bag means those containers used in the collection of solid waste, which have been approved by the company for use by both residential and commercial customers. 
Area means the area within the boundaries of the incorporated areas of the city, as they exist as of the effective date in addition to future boundary changes based upon annexations. 
Commercial unit means any structure, whether freestanding or designed to serve multiple tenants, the primary purpose of which is for conducting business. For the purpose of this article, this designation shall include those structures designated for multifamily residential with greater than four units. 
Company means any organization, firm, person, entity, corporation or other business that contracts with customers to provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste material as defined in this article, and including but not limited to construction/demolition debris, dead animals, garbage, waste, storm debris, yard trimmings, and recyclable material. 
Construction/demolition debris shall have the meaning set forth by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (Georgia EPD, chapter 391-3-4.01(14)). 
Construction site means any parcel of land or real property having land disturbance, clearing and grading, demolition, improvements and betterments, renovation, remodeling and/or new construction work performed thereon or about the real property or premises whether or not a land disturbance and/or building permit is required. 
Customer means any firm, person, entity, corporation or organization that contracts with a company for the collection and disposal of solid waste material as defined in this article, and including but not limited to construction/demolition debris, dead animals, garbage, waste, storm debris, yard trimmings, and recyclable material. 
Dead animals means animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten pounds in weight that have died from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use. 
Effective date means any contract executed between the city and any company on or after January 1, 2006. 
Environmental laws means all applicable laws, directives, rules, ordinances, codes, guidelines, regulations, governmental, administrative or judicial orders or decrees or other legal requirements of any kind, including, without limitation, common law, whether currently in existence or hereafter promulgated, enacted, adopted or amended, relating to safety, preservation or protection of human health and the environment (including ambient air, surface water, groundwater, land, or subsurface strata) and/or relating to the handling, treatment, transportation or disposal of waste, substances or materials, including, without limitation, any matters related to releases and threatened releases of materials and substances. 
Garbage shall have the meaning set forth at Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (Georgia EPD, chapter 391-3-4-.01(21)). 
Gross receipts means the total amount collected by the company from any and all customers for services rendered under authority of this article as a result of charges for service. Gross receipts shall not include the infrastructure maintenance fee identified in this article. 
Hazardous materials means any pollutant, contaminant, hazardous or toxic substance, constituent or material, including, without limitation, petroleum products and their derivatives, or other substances, regulated under or pursuant to any environmental laws. The term "hazardous materials" also includes any pollutant, contaminant, hazardous or toxic substance, constituent or material, including, without limitation, petroleum products and their derivatives, or other substance that is, after the date first written above, deemed hazardous by any judicial or governmental entity, body or agency having jurisdiction to make that determination. 
Hazardous waste means any waste regulated under or pursuant to any environmental laws, including, but not limited to, any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the board of natural resources, chapter 291-3-11. The term "hazardous waste" also includes hazardous materials and any waste that is, after the effective date of this agreement, deemed hazardous by any judicial or governmental entity, board, body or agency having jurisdiction to make that determination. The term "hazardous waste" will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition where a conflict exists in the definitions employed by two or more governmental entities having concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction over hazardous waste. 
Residential unit means any structure, including single-family and multifamily dwellings of four units or less, the primary purpose for which is for living. 
Solid waste means the collection of residential and commercial nonrecyclable waste, residential and commercial recyclable waste, and residential yard trimmings/waste. 
Term means a period of one year from the effective date. 
Waste means all perishable and nonperishable solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including residential or commercial garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 1, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-20. - Grant of nonexclusive contract. 
(a)  The city shall hereby grant to companies a nonexclusive contract, pursuant to the terms set forth herein, to use the public streets, alleys, roads and thoroughfares within the city for the purpose of operating and engaging in the business of collecting and disposing of waste; including, but not limited to, contracting with customers and providing service pursuant to contract therefor, placing and servicing containers, operating trucks, vehicles and trailers, and such other operations and activity as are customary and/or incidental to such business and service. 
(b)  It is illegal for any company to operate outside the terms of this agreement. Should companies engage in operations that violate this contract, or operate without first notifying the city of acceptance of this contract's terms, said company is guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 2, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-21. - Term. 
The term of any agreement is for a period of one year beginning on the effective date of the contract execution and terminating on the first anniversary of said date. The company shall begin performance under this contract immediately after the effective date of the contract execution. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 3, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-22. - Scope and nature of operation. 
(a)  Residential and commercial refuse and waste. The company may collect and deliver for disposal all residential and commercial refuse and waste accumulated within the corporate limits of the city by the company's customers and the words "refuse," "garbage," "trash" and "waste," when used in this article, are used for convenience and, unless the context shows otherwise, refer residential and commercial refuse and waste. The company will furnish the personnel and equipment to collect refuse, provide the services described herein, and as contracted for with its customers, in an efficient and businesslike manner. 
(b)  Containers, bins and other services. Service-provided company shall provide container, bin and other collection service for the collection of residential and commercial refuse and waste according to the individual customer agreements and applicable city regulations and shall make provision for the special collection of such refuse and waste upon request. The company shall cause or require its equipment, containers and bins to be kept and maintained in a manner to not cause or create a threat to the public health and shall keep the same in a good state of repair. 
(c)  Collection operation. 
(1)  Collection times. Save and except as provided in this section, collection shall not start before 7:00 a.m. nor continue after 7:00 p.m. at any location. Operations may only be conducted Monday through Saturday. 
(2)  Variances. Company may request variances to this collection period for properties in which normal collection procedures would cause a clear and present safety hazard. All requests for variances must be filed in writing with the city community development department on forms which can be obtained at the city community development department, and include documentation of the hazard created by the collection operation period. A determination regarding the application shall be made by the city within 30 days from the date of the application and communicated to the applicant. The city may charge a fee for each variance location requested as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(3)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city pursuant to subsection 46-22(c)(2), may submit an appeal to the community development department within 30 days of the date of the communication of the city's decision on forms which can be obtained at the city community development department. The appeal shall be submitted in writing and be heard by the city board of appeals in accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth by this Code, and said board within 90 days of the filing of the appeal. Any person aggrieved by an action of the city board of appeals may appeal within 30 days to the superior court of the county by writ of certiorari or as otherwise required by law. 
(4)  Complaints. Should a collection operation variance be granted and the city receives complaints about the collection operation, the city shall verify and substantiate the factual basis for the complaint. Should the complaints be substantiated, the collection operation variance will be revoked, and the company is required to operate within the collection times set forth in subsection 46-22(c)(1). 
(d)  Holidays. The company shall observe such holidays as it, in its sole discretion, determines appropriate. 
(e)  Customer service telephone information. All companies must maintain a customer service telephone number while conducting business within the city. The telephone number must be publicly listed in a phone book and available through directory assistance. Each company providing trash receptacles, whether commercial or residential, must mark each receptacle with the company's name and telephone number in letters not less than one and one-half inches in height. Each company must provide a mechanism to accept, investigate, and respond to customer complaints. Companies are strongly encouraged to use multimedia devices including interactive websites, e-mail, fax, and automated telephone systems. Service calls received by the city as a result of noncompany performance will result in the consideration of revocation of a nonexclusive contract or the city's choice to not renew an existing agreement. 
(f)  Minimum requirements for invoices. Any invoice, bill, statement, or other device intended to request remittance by the customer to the company of funds for payment of service shall include, at a minimum, the company's telephone number and payment methods available to customers. 
(g)  Responsibility for customer education. It is the company's obligation and responsibility to educate all customers on industry trends and best practices relating to solid waste collection, removal, and disposal. Such education programs must consist of the following elements: recycling; holiday schedules; new customer information; and any service-related items. All companies have the obligation to inform customers of any noncollected trash or items placed for collection by the customer but not covered under the agreement between the customer and the company. Further, it is the company's obligation and responsibility to educate customers on days of collection for each specific service provided. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 4, 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 2009-07-09, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 46-23. - Vehicles to be covered and identified. 
All vehicles used by the company for the collection and transportation of refuse is covered at all times while loaded and in transit to prevent the blowing or scattering of refuse onto the public streets or properties adjacent thereto, and such vehicles is clearly marked with the company's name and telephone number in letters not less than 1½ inches in height. 
(1)  The company must provide a comprehensive and proactive driver safety education program which encourages safety on city streets. Such program must be demonstrated and conveyed to the city. The company must comply with all other regulatory agencies, both local, state, or otherwise, with respect to commercial vehicle operation within the city. Service calls received by the city as a result of noncompany performance will result in the consideration of revoking a nonexclusive contract or the city's choice to not renew an existing agreement. 
(2)  The company must manage collection services delivered within the city to minimize the number of vehicles on city roads. Coordination between haulers and service providers is strongly encouraged to manage service vehicles on residential streets and neighborhoods. Companies may provide a discounted rate for neighborhood or area collection programs in order to promote the reduction of collection vehicles on city streets. 
(3)  Should the company utilize "scout" trucks to facilitate collection in residential areas where it is not feasible to use standard collection vehicles, such vehicles must be covered at all times while loaded and in transit should they exceed 30 miles per hour or be driven more than 200 yards on a public street. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 5, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-24. - Regulation of containers. 
The company may rent, lease, provide or define specifications for containers to any customer within the corporate limits of the city for refuse storage and collection purposes subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  All containers are constructed and maintained according to industry practice. 
(2)  All containers are equipped with stable covers to prevent blowing or scattering of refuse while being transported for disposal of their contents. 
(3)  All containers, save and except those being used for the purpose of collecting and storing rubble, building and scrap construction materials, are equipped with covers suitable to prevent blowing or scattering refuse and access to the container by animals while the container is at the site designated by customer. 
(4)  All containers are periodically cleaned, maintained, serviced and kept in a reasonably good state of repair to prevent the unreasonable accumulation of refuse residues, to avoid excessive odor and harborage for rodents and flies resulting from excessive residues remaining after collection of containers. 
(5)  All containers are clearly marked with the company's name and telephone number in letters not less than 1½ inches in height. 
(6)  All containers shall not be on public rights-of-way and are located so as to not interfere, block, obstruct or impede the normal use of any sidewalk, street, alley driveway or fire lane, or to block, obstruct or impede sight distance at street, road or alley intersections. 
(7)  All containers, bins, or other collection instruments must be kept free from graffiti, rust, broken and nonoperational parts and pieces, and litter in and around the area. 
(8)  It is the responsibility of each company to educate their customers on the regulations of containers and maintain industry standards, policies, and procedures, which promote an aesthetically pleasing environment in and around all refuse and waste containers and receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 6, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-25. - Disposal of refuse. 
(a)  The company will deliver all refuse and waste collected from its customers within the city, except for materials which the company may select for recovery and recycling, to a disposal facility that is permitted by the EPD to accept such refuse and waste. Rules and regulations governing hours of operation and disposal practices at the disposal facility will be observed and followed by the company while engaged in the disposal of refuse pursuant to this article. Any items collected as part of a recycling program are delivered to a facility where recovery and reuse occurs. 
(b)  Should any company choose to offload or dispose of materials collected by one vehicle into another for transport to the final disposal facility, the company should make every available effort to perform such refuse transfer on property owned by the company or privately owned property where the company has an agreement with the property owner to perform such activity. In the event any transfer occurs on public land, including streets, alleys, rights-of-way, roads, thoroughfares, avenues, parkways, expressways, or other areas designed and designated for public travel, the company shall make every effort available to clean the area after completion of the transfer to ensure the area is maintained at the same or better level than if the area was not be used for this activity. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 7, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-26. - Contract and rental fees. 
The streets, rights-of-way, and public easements to be used by the company in the operation of its business within the boundaries of the city, as such boundaries now exist and exist from time to time during the term of this contract, are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers, and the city will incur costs to regulate and administer this article. In consideration of such benefits, costs and expenses, the company shall through the term of its contract collect an infrastructure maintenance fee equal to five percent of the company's gross receipts to customers within the city, exclusive of sales tax. 
(1)  Fees paid. The infrastructure maintenance fee is payable quarterly to the city and delivered to the city in function together with a statement indicating the derivation and calculation of such payment. Each such quarterly payment is due on the 15th day of the second month following the end of the quarterly period for which said payment is due. The quarterly payments are due on February 15, May 15, August 15, and November 15 of each year during the term hereof, with the February 15 payment being based upon the company's gross receipts during the calendar quarter ending the prior December 31 and being payment for the rights and privileges granted hereunder for said calendar quarter, the May 15 payment being based upon the company's gross receipts during the calendar quarter ending the prior March 31 and being payment for the rights and privileges granted hereunder for said calendar quarter, the August 15 payment being based upon the company's gross receipts during the calendar quarter ending the prior June 30 and being payment for the rights and privileges granted hereunder for said calendar quarter, and the November 15 payment being based upon the company's gross receipts during the calendar quarter ending the prior September 30 and being payment for the rights and privileges granted hereunder for said calendar quarter. All bills generated by companies after May 1, 2006, shall include the infrastructure maintenance fee. The city shall provide material relating to the education and marketing efforts of the infrastructure maintenance fee as well as provide education and training to company employees to ensure a consistent message is conveyed to constituents of the city. For purposes of verifying the amount of such fee, the books of the company shall at all reasonable times be subject to inspection by the duly authorized representatives of the city. 
(2)  Credit for fees paid. Should the city not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing sums of money is in lieu of contracts, fees, street of alley rentals or charges, easement or article fees or charges aforesaid, then the city agrees that it will apply so much of said sums of money paid as may be necessary to the company's obligations, if any, to pay any such contract, article charges, other charges, fees, rentals, easement, taxes or charges. 
(3)  Reporting. Any company providing service pursuant to this article or a resulting contract shall from time to time provide the city with the necessary statistics regarding waste collected and disposed which shall allow the city to comply with state reporting requirements. Such information is in the manner and format requested by the city and provide adequate details for the city to maintain compliance with local, state, federal, and all other guidelines relating to solid waste collection, removal, and disposal. 
(4)  Dedicated revenue. The infrastructure maintenance fee collected by the city under this article is dedicated to the following: 
a.  Maintenance of the city's streets, corridors, alleys, thoroughfares, and transportation routes; 
b.  Administration of contract compliance between customers and companies where service is received as provided in this article; and 
c.  Collection of litter and trash within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 8, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-27. - Compliance with law. 
The company shall conduct under this article in compliance with the material provisions of all applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, and with the general specifications contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 9, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-28. - Insurance provided by company. 
(a)  Minimum coverage requirements. The company shall maintain throughout the term of its contract property damage coverage, general liability insurance, and automobile liability insurance for any automobile owned or operated by the company, with an insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city, insuring against claims for liability and damages for the benefit of the city. The insurance shall include the city as an additional insured. Property damage coverage insurance under this section is a minimum of $500,000.00. Automobile liability insurance under this section shall, at a minimum, have limits of $250,000.00 for bodily injury for each person, and $500,000.00 for each occurrence, and property damage of $250,000.00 for each occurrence and general liability insurance under this section is a minimum of $500,000.00 for the protection of the public in connection with: 
(1)  Property damage liability. Property damage liability to persons or damages to property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of the company, its servants, agents or employees or to which the company's negligence shall in any way contribute; 
(2)  Miscellaneous liability. Arising out of any claim or invasion of the right of privacy, for defamation of any person, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person; 
(3)  Contractors liability. Arising out of the company's operations and relationships with any independent contractor or subcontractor. 
(b)  Employer's liability of insurance. If the company is required by state statutes, the company shall maintain throughout the term of the contract resulting from this article the requisite statutory workers' compensation insurance, and a minimum of $100,000.00 employer's liability insurance. The company is required to show compliance to this section by submitting documentation of such coverage from an approved carrier licensed in the state, or documentation explaining the exemption from employer's liability insurance should they not meet the state requirements to carry such coverage. 
(c)  Certificate of insurance. The insurance policy, or policies, obtained by the company in compliance with this section is approved by the city manager or his designee at their reasonable discretion, and the certificate of insurance for the insurance policy is filed and maintained with the city during the term of the contract resulting from this article with a copy of the endorsement required under subsection (d) of this section to be attached or made a part of such certificate. 
(d)  Endorsements. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this article shall contain the following conditions by endorsement: 
(1)  Additional insured. The city is an additional insured and the terms "owner" and "city" shall include all authorities, boards, bureaus, commissions, divisions, departments and offices of the city and the individual members, officers, employees and agents thereof in their official capacities and/or while acting on behalf of the city. 
(2)  Other insurance clause. The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city when the city is an insured on the policy. 
(3)  No recourse. Companies issuing the insurance policies shall not recourse against the city for payment of any premium or assessment. 
(e)  Increase requirements. The city may chose to amend this article to make reasonable adjustments to the insurance coverage and their limits when deemed necessary and prudent based upon changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 10, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-29. - Indemnification and hold harmless. 
The company agrees to indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees, against and from any and all claims by or on behalf of any person, firm, corporation or other entity arising from any negligent act or omission or willful misconduct of the company, or any of its agents, contractors, servants, employees or contractors, and from and against all costs, counsel fees, expenses and liabilities incurred in or about any such claim or proceeding brought thereon. Promptly after receipt from any third party by the city of a written notice of any demand, claim or circumstance that, immediately or with the lapse of time, would give rise to a claim or the commencement (or threatened commencement) of any action, proceeding or investigation (an "asserted claim") that may result in losses for which indemnification may be sought hereunder, the city shall give written notice thereof (the "claims notice") to the company provided, however, that a failure to give such notice shall not prejudice the city's right to indemnification hereunder except to the extent that the company is actually and materially prejudiced thereby. The claims notice shall describe the asserted claim in reasonable detail, and shall indicate the amount (estimated, if necessary) of the losses that have been or may be suffered by the city when such information is available. The company may elect to compromise or defend, at its own expense and by its own counsel, any asserted claim. If the company elects to compromise or defend such asserted claim, it shall, within 20 business days following its receipt of the claims notice (or sooner, if the nature of the asserted claim so required), notify the city of its intent to do so, and the city shall cooperate, at the expense of the company, in the compromise of, or defense against, such asserted claim. If the company elects not to compromise or defend the asserted claim, fails to notify the city of its election as herein provided or contests its obligation to provide indemnification under this agreement, the city may pay, compromise or defend such asserted claim with all reasonable costs and expenses borne by the company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither the company nor the city shall settle or compromise any claim without the consent of the other party; provided, however, that such consent to settlement or compromise shall not be unreasonably withheld. In any event, the city and the company may participate, at their own expense, in the defense of such asserted claim. If the company chooses to defend any asserted claim, the city shall make available to the company any books, records or other documents within its control that are necessary or appropriate for such defense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 11, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-30. - Forfeiture and terminating of contract. 
(a)  Material breach. In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city under this article or otherwise, the city reserves the right to declare any resulting contract from this article forfeited and to terminate the contract and all rights and privileges of the company hereunder in the event of a material breach of the terms and conditions hereof. A material breach by the company shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fees. Failure to pay the fees set out in section 46-26; 
(2)  Telephone listings. Failure to keep and maintain a telephone listing and office or answering service that is available by phone without long distance charge during regular business hours for service to the public, and which telephone or office shall, at minimum, provide and maintain the following services: 
a.  Coordinate and provide information concerning deposits, payments and accounts to customers and prospective customers; 
b.  Respond to customer and prospective customer questions and issues about billings, accounts, deposits and services; 
c.  Coordination with the city with respect to private sector and public works projects and issues related to or affecting the company's operation; and 
d.  Immediate response, upon request, to police, fire and other emergency situations in which the public health and safety requires action with respect to or assistance regarding company's property. 
(3)  Provision of services. Failure to materially provide the services provided for in this article within six months of execution of this contract; 
(4)  Misrepresentation. Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of any contract resulting from this article; or 
(5)  Conviction. Conviction of any director, officer, employee, or agent of the company of the offense of bribery or fraud connected with or resulting from the award of a contract from this article. 
(b)  Operation information. Material misrepresentation of fact knowingly made to the city with respect to or regarding the company's operations, management, revenues, services or reports required pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Economic hardship. The company shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees. 
(d)  Forfeiture and proceedings. Any unwarranted and intentional neglect, failure or refusal of the company to comply with any material provision of this article or resulting contract within 30 days after written notice from city setting forth the specific provision and noncompliance, said notice to be mailed to company at its principal place of business by certified mail, return receipt requested, is deemed a breach of this article, and the city council, upon notice to the company and hearing, may, for good cause, declare a contract forfeited and exclude company from further use of the streets of the city under this article, and the company shall thereupon surrender all rights in and under this article and contract. 
(1)  Proceedings. In order for the city to declare a forfeiture pursuant to section 46-26(1), this subsection (d) and subsection (d)(3) of this section, the city shall make a written demand that the company comply with any such provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to this article. If such violation by the company continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the council may take under consideration the issue of termination of the resulting contract from this article. The city shall cause to be served upon the company, at least 20 days prior to the date of such a council meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting. Notice is given of the meeting and issue which the council is to consider. 
(2)  Hearing. The council shall hear and consider the issue, hear any person interested therein, and shall determine whether or not any violation by the company has occurred. 
(3)  Forfeiture. If the council shall determine that the violation by the company was the fault of the company and within its control, the council may declare the contract forfeited and terminated, or the council may grant to the company a period of time for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 12, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-31. - Transfer, sale or conveyance by company. 
The company shall not transfer, assign, sell or convey any rights granted under any resulting contract from this article without the prior approval of the council expressed by article; provided that this article shall not apply to vehicles, replacements, maintenance, upgrades or modifications of equipment, machinery, containers and buildings by company for the purpose of maintaining and continuing its operation within the city; and provided further that company may, in its sole discretion and upon written notice to the city, transfer, assign, sell or convey this article to a wholly owned subsidiary of the company or to an affiliated entity that is under common control with company (e.g., has a common parent entity). 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 13, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-32. - Foreclosure. 
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the assets and property of the company used for and dedicated to providing service pursuant to this article, the company shall notify the city of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the company has taken place and the provisions of this article governing the consent of the council to such change in control of the company shall apply. Upon the foreclosure or judicial sale, or the leasing of all or a substantial part of the property and assets of the company dedicated to and used for the purposes of providing service pursuant to this article, without the prior approval of the council, the council may, upon hearing and notice, terminate any contract resulting from this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 14, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-33. - Receivership and bankruptcy. 
The council shall have the right to cancel any contract resulting from this article 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the company, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, other action or preceding, whether voluntary or involuntary, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, unless: 
(1)  Trustee compliance. Within 120 days after his election or appointment, such receiver trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this article and remedied all defaults thereunder; or 
(2)  Trustee agreement. Such receiver or trustee, within 120 days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction, whereby the receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this article granted to the company. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 15, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-34. - Retention of city police powers. 
The city retains and reserves all of its police powers and the rights, privileges, and immunities that it now has under the law to regulate, patrol and police the streets and public ways within the city, and the granting of any contract as a result of this article shall in no way interfere with the improvements to, or maintenance of, any street, alley or public way, and the rights of the city to use said streets, alleys and public ways. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 16, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-35. - Amendments of city articles and regulations. 
The city reserves the right and power, pursuant to its police power, after due notice to the company, to modify, amend, alter, change or eliminate any rules, regulations, fees, charges and rates of the city, and to impose such additional conditions that are not inconsistent with the rights granted by this article, upon the company and all persons, firms or entities of the same class as the company, as may be reasonably necessary in the discretion council to preserve and protect the public, health, safety and welfare and/or insure adequate service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 17, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-36. - Taxes. 
The company shall promptly pay all lawful ad valorem taxes, levies and assessments, if any, that are imposed upon the company. Absent an administrative or judicial challenge, or appeal, the failure to pay any such tax, levy or assessment is a breach of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 18, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-37. - Public necessity. 
The council hereby finds and declares that the public welfare, convenience and necessity require the service which is to be furnished by the company. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 19, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-38. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, part or provision hereof is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional the same shall not affect the validity hereof as a whole or any part or provision other than the part or parts held invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 20, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-39. - Interpretation. 
The use of captions or headings for the various sections of this article are for convenience of parties only and do not reflect the intent of the parties. The rule of interpretation to solve ambiguities in a contract against the party drafting such contract shall not apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 21, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-40. - No suspension of laws. 
All provisions of the ordinances of the city as now existing or as may be amended from time to time, and all provisions of the statutes of the state applicable to general law cities is a part of any resulting contract from this article as fully as if the same had been expressly stated herein, and said city retains and may exercise all of the governmental and police powers and all other rights and powers not directly inconsistent with the terms, conditions and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 22, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-41. - Peaceful employment. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city and the company is and are hereby authorized and entitled to act in reliance upon the terms, conditions and provisions of this article and any resulting contract and, subject thereto, the company shall collect rates for service, operate and conduct its business and work within the city, and enjoy the benefits and privileges of this article during the term hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 23, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 46-42. - Acceptance by company. 
Within 30 days after February 20, 2007, or within 30 days of establishing a business within the corporate city limits, all companies operating a residential or commercial refuse waste service shall file with the city its acceptance of the terms and provisions of this article, and request for contract. The acceptance and request for contract is in writing on the company's letterhead and provide as follows: 
City of Sandy Springs 
Attention: City Manager 
7840 Roswell Road, Suite 550 
Sandy Springs, GA 30350 
___________(the "Company"), acting by and through an officer who is acting within its official capacity and authority, hereby accepts this article to operate a refuse and solid waste collection and disposal system within the city as said article is set forth and provided herewith. The company agrees to be bound and governed by each term, provision and condition of the article, to accept and to give the benefits provided by the article, and to perform each service and duty set forth and provided for in the article in a businesslike and reasonable manner and in compliance with the article. 

 
(Ord. No. 2007-02-14, § 26, 2-20-2007) 
Chapter 50 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General authority relative to streets, § 1.03(b)(33). 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
Sec. 50-2. - Obstruction of right-of-way. 
(a)  No person shall place or cause to place in any street and/or sidewalk debris, rubbish, irrigation water, boxes, displays, signs, poles, goods, merchandise, or any other object so as to impede and/or endanger traffic on streets and/or sidewalks. 
(b)  No person or company shall construct or maintain a drive, yard, or lot constructed of gravel, pebbles, or stone in such a manner that vehicles cause loose stones, pebbles or gravel to be thrown on to the adjacent street and/or sidewalk. 
(c)  Any personal property placed on the right-of-way following an eviction is removed within 24 hours of physical eviction unless an extension of time is requested on behalf of the evicted tenant. For purposes of this chapter, such property is deemed abandoned property 24 hours following eviction unless the landlord by contract specifies a shorter time. If the property is not removed within 24 hours, the city may commence removal and cite the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 2, § 1), 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-3. - Use by public utilities. 
Any public utility occupying or utilizing in any manner the city streets, rights-of-way, easements, or any other city property shall enter into a franchise agreement with the city within a reasonable time period of commencing operations or activities with such time period not to exceed the term of 60 days; unless the city council grants an extension to such time period. A utility not currently granted a franchise agreement with the city which shall use and occupy any city streets, rights-of-way, easements, or on any other city property is liable to the city for the payment of reasonable franchise fees commensurate with those fees charged to similarly situated public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-97, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 50-4. - Utility permits. 
No utility shall perform any construction, repairs or improvements in the public right-of-way without a permit issued by the director of the department of public works as designee. Such permit is issued upon a showing that there will be compliance with the utility permits, policies, and guidelines, which publication is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2006-05-34, 5-16-2006) 
Sec. 50-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § I, adopted March 5, 2019, repealed § 50-5 which pertained to definitions, and derived from Ord. No. 2014-10-33, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 21, 2014. 
Sec. 50-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § I, adopted March 5, 2019, repealed § 50-6 which pertained to placement of small cell technology in the right-of-way, and derived from Ord. No. 2014-10-33, § 3, adopted Oct. 21, 2014. 
Secs. 50-7—50-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSTALLATION, REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 50-24. - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise stated in this article, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
Sec. 50-25. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person or company shall perform construction work in the street right-of-way without a permit issued by the city department of public works. Such permit is posted at the construction site at all times. Such construction must conform to the construction/maintenance guidelines and specifications of the city and/or the state department of transportation. 
(b)  No person or company shall construct a drive or entrance to any public road without a permit from the city department of public works. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to construct any permanent feature such as an irrigation system, sign or fence in the street right-of-way without a permit from the city department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 1, § 2), 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-26. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Any permit shall indicate in writing the following: 
(1)  All proposed repair, work, maintenance, or alteration to existing city sidewalks or streets, including, when possible, proposed measurements and plats of any repair, alteration, or maintenance. 
(2)  A statement attesting to compliance with applicable local, state, and federal laws. 
(b)  The department of public works is authorized to establish additional guidelines for applying for permits. Said guidelines are consistent with this Code and must be approved by the city manager. Permits are issued upon a showing that the work to be permitted will comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and standards. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 1, § 3), 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-27. - Road signage and warnings. 
(a)  Each person or company to whom a permit has been issued to perform construction work in the street right-of-way shall place appropriate traffic devices and signage as dictated by the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation who obtains a permit under this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk, or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of the excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 1, § 4), 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-28. - Repair after excavation. 
(a)  When any part of any street, alley, or other property of the city is torn or dug up for any purpose, the person or company performing such construction work shall promptly restore the street, sidewalk, and landscaping to a condition as good as or better condition than before the construction commenced. 
(b)  The city department of public works may conduct a final inspection to ensure that the street, sidewalk, or public way is restored to a condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done, and that all debris, materials, tools, and equipment are removed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 1, § 5), 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-29. - Creation of roads. 
The city transportation engineer or his designate shall approve the design for any new roads within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 1, § 6), 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 50-30. - Creation of sidewalks. 
(a)  All sidewalks required under this section are further regulated under section 103-80. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Construction of any new single family home, unless such single family home is: 
a.  Adjacent to a road on the sidewalk master plan network, in which case sidewalk shall be provided in accordance with this code section and section 103-80 along the frontage on the sidewalk master plan network; or 
b.  Required to provide such sidewalk on a new street created by the subdivision of land and platted by the city. 
(2)  Renovation of any existing single family home. 
(3)  Any lot or parcel for which a development permit or building permit is issued, but where the community development director determines that the permit is for an accessory use or structure to the principal use or structure or for minor repairs or additions to the principal building or structure in existence. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, sidewalks shall be created as follows: 
(1)  Sidewalks and curb ramps shall be constructed in all new development or redevelopment along all abutting or internal streets, existing or new, private or public, for the entire property frontage. 
(2)  The following permits and activities shall require the installation of sidewalk along all roadway frontages of the affected property: 
a.  Development permits. 
b.  Land disturbance permits. 
c.  Building permits. 
d.  Any permit issued for renovation in the city's zoning overlay district that meets the threshold amount specified in the zoning ordinance. 
e.  All commercial, office or multi-family construction located on any street. 
f.  Subdivision of property that creates a new public or private street (minimum one side of street). 
g.  Nonresidential subdivision plat or nonresidential combination plat. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 1, § 7), 2-7-2006; Ord. No. 2015-07-19 , 7-7-2015; Ord. No. 2015-09-32 , § I, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 50-31. - Existing sidewalks. 
(a)  For any land or building development where sidewalks are required as outlined in section 50-30, and there is an existing sidewalk along the road or street frontage, an inspection of the sidewalk is made by the director of the department of public works or his agent. If the inspection shows the sidewalk is deficient or does not exist along the entire frontage, the owner must construct or repair the sidewalk to current design specifications including material revisions, such as concrete to brick, as required by the director of the department of public works. 
(b)  The property owner is required to maintain the sidewalk along the entire lot frontage by maintaining the grass or landscaping installed between the sidewalk and the edge or curb of the roadway. This section applies to newly created sidewalks. 
(c)  No person is permitted to erect any drain, gutter, downspout, valley, flat, or sloping roof of any character that will in any manner drain or shed water on any sidewalk of this city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 1, § 8), 2-7-2006) 
Secs. 50-32—50-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASSEMBLAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. The city manager may delegate his authority or be assisted by other employees as required. 
Event means any march, meeting, demonstration, picket line, procession, motorcade, rally, or gathering for a common purpose, consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof upon or in the streets, parks, or other public grounds within the city that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or that endangers or has the possibility of endangering the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
Organization or group of private persons means a group of three or more persons, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Private purpose means any purpose not commanded or directed by law, statute, ordinance, or regulation to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-82, § 1(ch. 18, art. 1, § 1), 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 50-52. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates, or fails to comply with, any provision of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-82, § 1(ch. 18, art. 5), 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 50-53. - Exceptions. 
This article shall specifically not apply to funeral processions; neighborhood parades, provided activities remain solely within the boundaries of such neighborhood; sporting events; school students going to or from classes or participating in properly supervised and sponsored activities; governmental entities acting within the scope of their functions; and other activities as provided for by law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-82, § 1(ch. 18, art. 2, § 2), 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 50-54. - Duties of city manager. 
The city manager shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the application of a permit and for the submission of any required information needed to review an application, administer, and enforce this article. 
(2)  To review an application submitted for completeness and to collect a permit licensing fee in the amount to be determined by resolution of the council which is equal to the administrative costs of processing the application plus the costs for the use of city services or property, unless the activity is conducted for the sole purpose of public issue speech protected under the First Amendment for which no costs are assessed for city services and property. 
(3)  To designate or coordinate sites and set time schedules; to coordinate with county authorities; and, where appropriate, to receive the approval of the state department of transportation, the county sheriff, or other necessary public officials. 
(4)  To issue a permit within ten days of receipt of an acceptable and complete application. 
(5)  To deny a permit within ten days of receipt of an application if the application is not complete or if any of the circumstances described in section 50-82 are found to be existing. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-82, § 1(ch. 18, art. 4, § 1), 10-17-2006) 
Secs. 50-55—50-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 50-80. - Required. 
Every person, organization, or group of private persons wishing to use public property or public roads in the city for an event is required to obtain a permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in the event within the city, unless such permit is prohibited under state law or the event is otherwise protected from this requirement by federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-82, § 1(ch. 18, art. 2, § 1), 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 50-81. - Application. 
Every person, organization, or group of private persons required to procure a permit under the provisions of this article shall submit an application for the permit to the city manager, which application shall conform to the requirements of this article in addition to the following: 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided herein, each application is a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted to the city manager within a reasonable time prior to the planned event for security purposes, verifications, and arrangements. A reasonable time shall in this instance be construed to mean a time of at least 15 days but no more than 60 days prior to the planned event. The city manager shall act upon the application within ten days of the receipt of a completed application. A person may make an emergency application to the mayor's office if an unforeseen circumstance arises requiring a response within less than ten days. The city manager shall have discretion to determine if an emergency exists and, subject to this article, grant or deny such permit. 
(2)  Each application shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the person, if the applicant is an individual, or the name, address, and telephone number of an applicant corporation, partnership, organization, or group; 
b.  Date, time, and location where the proposed event is to take place, including proposed routes of travel on public streets to be used for the event; 
c.  Description of activity involved with the event; 
d.  An approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will be involved with the event; 
e.  Names, home addresses, and telephone numbers of individuals involved with the applicant, if not an individual, who have oversight responsibility for the organization and conduct of the event on behalf of applicant; 
f.  A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, signs, or other attention getting devices proposed to be used during the event; 
g.  Plans for disposal of trash and clean up of the event area; first aid provisions; vehicle and trailer storage provisions; and toilet facilities available to event participants; and 
h.  Any additional information which the city manager may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, county, state, or federal government, other than minor traffic violations. 
(3)  The application is signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner, if a partnership, or by an officer, if a corporation. 
(4)  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this article is kept and maintained by the city and is utilized only by the officials of the city responsible for administering these provisions. 
(5)  Any false statement in an application for a permit may be grounds for revocation or denial of the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-82, § 1(ch. 18, art. 3, § 1), 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 50-82. - Procedure for application review. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete application for permit, the city manager shall have it reviewed by the city departments, the services of which may be impacted by the event. 
(b)  Upon receiving reports from the city departments, the city manager shall consider the impact of the event as whether it will unreasonably disrupt and obstruct the necessary flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  As part of the city manager's review, conditions may be made for alternate routes and locations of the event to ameliorate issues of traffic flow and public safety, which conditions shall attach to the permit, if issued. 
(d)  The city manager shall also review an applicant's plans for: 
(1)  Trash clean up and disposal provisions; 
(2)  First aid provisions; 
(3)  Vehicle and trailer storage provisions; and 
(4)  Toilet facilities available to participants. 
Should the city manger determine an applicant's plans presented for these services to be inadequate, the application may be denied. 
(e)  Upon completion of the review of the application, the city manager shall issue a permit for the event, including its proposed routes of travel, if the city manager finds the event can occur without unreasonably impacting upon the use of the public streets, public property, and resources of the city and without endangering the public's health, safety, and welfare. 
(f)  Any person whose application under this article is denied by the city manager may appeal such denial within three business days after the denial to the city council, which shall consider such appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the filing of the appeal. 
(g)  The council, in considering the appeal, shall determine if good cause exists for denial of the permit and, after hearing and receiving all evidence, shall either uphold the decision of the city manager or reverse the decision and grant a permit. In reversing, the council may attach any requirements deemed necessary to the permit, as conditions to its issuance for protection of the public health and safety. 
(h)  The city hall grounds may not be used for holding a parade, assembly, demonstration, or other event on any weekday prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. or on any Sunday prior to 1:00 p.m. or after 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2006-10-82, § 1(ch. 18, art. 4, § 2), 10-17-2006) 
Secs. 50-83—50-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL EVENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, adopted Feb. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. IV in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 50-108—50-119, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-11-63, § 1(ch. 11, art. 12, §§ 1—11), adopted Nov. 20, 2007; Ord. No. 2015-02-02 , adopted Feb. 17, 2015; and Ord. No. 2017-08-19 , § I, adopted Aug. 15, 2017. 

Sec. 50-108. - Special event policy. 
It shall be unlawful for any special event to occur in the city without a validly issued special event permit and full compliance with the provisions of the city's special event policy, which provisions shall be promulgated by the city manager and be made available to applicants upon request. For the purposes of this chapter, special event means any organized for-profit or nonprofit activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education which (i) takes place on public property or (ii) takes place on private property, but requires special public services and which is permitted by the city under this article. Gatherings or activities that take place on private property and that make no use of city streets, other than for lawful parking, are not subject to the provisions of this article, but shall comply with all other requirements specified by ordinance as to the use of residential property. 
By way of example, special events include, but are not limited to; fairs, tours, grand opening celebrations, races, parades, marches, rallies, assemblies, festivals, film production, concerts, holiday celebrations, bicycle runs, and block parties. Private social gatherings which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking are not included. Garage sales, lawn sales, rummage sales, flea market sales, or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property are not included. 
A parade, march, or procession subject to this article is defined to be a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of five or more vehicles and ten or more persons, or a combination of three or more vehicles and five or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets or sidewalks of the city. Specifically excepted from this definition are funeral processions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, a producer is any person responsible for planning, producing and conducting a special event. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 50-109. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of any of the sections of this article or any part thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 50-110. - Liability. 
(a)  At the discretion of the city, prior to issuance of a permit, the producer shall provide to the city proof of comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of $300,000.00 personal injury per person, $1,000,000.00 maximum, and $100,000.00 property damage against all claims arising from permits issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The producer of any special event shall provide a written agreement in a form satisfactory to the city providing the producer shall defend, pay, and save harmless the city, its officers, employees, and agents from liability of all personal or property damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event and from any and all claims, attorney fees or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the special event. The agreement shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. 
(c)  The city, its officials, employees, or agents shall not incur any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which the permit has been issued. The city, its officials, employees, or agents shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of the right-of-way or other public property. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 50-111. - Vendors of food and merchandise. 
(a)  The sale of food and/or merchandise by vendors shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided each vendor is authorized to participate in writing by the producer of the event and provided further each vendor shall be subject to all conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. 
(b)  The producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and control of all food and merchandise vendors as a component of a special event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. 
(c)  Authorized vendors of the producer, providing food and/or merchandise, shall not be required to obtain a separate vendor permit to operate during the special event. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, food vendors authorized by the producer shall be required to comply with rules and regulations of the county health department as to the preparation and service of food. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 50-112. - Miscellaneous provisions regarding vendors. 
(a)  Each vendor authorized by the producer of the special event shall prominently display on his or her person a badge provided by the producer and identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the special event which shall bear the signature of the producer or his designated agent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer as provided herein to engage in any business within a distance of 100 yards of the special event from one hour before the start of the special event, and until one hour after the special event. 
(c)  A special event permit granted by the city may provide for the city to close designated streets and intersections to allow use of the public right-of-way for the special event during designated hours and days. The producer shall bear all responsibility for having all vendors remove any structures and all trash and debris from the designated area by not later than the time stated under the permit for re-opening of all streets. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 50-113. - Other permits. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to allow the city's departments and staffs to review an application for a special event permit outside the regular ordinance standards in order to determine how disruptive a special event may be to the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks and to make recommendations and allowances. Administrative guidelines issued by the department of community development shall be followed by the city in allowing specified signage and advertising which may not be in compliance with existing zoning ordinances for banners and vendors. Upon approval by the city manager, or his designee, recommendations and allowances made shall become conditions of the permit to be followed and carried out by the producer. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  The holder of a resident or nonresident license to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages shall obtain an off-premises license and event permit for pouring alcoholic beverages for an authorized function or event as provided in chapter 6 of this Code if he is authorized to participate by the producer; and 
(2)  A permit allowing fireworks shall be approved and permitted by the chief of the city's fire department or his designee. Further, the person to be performing the firework display shall be pyrotechnics licensed and qualified in the state. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 50-114. - Denial or revocation of a special event permit. 
(a)  Reasons for denial of a special event permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The special event will unnecessarily disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical solution; 
(2)  The special event will interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
(3)  The location of the special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; 
(4)  The special event will cause unnecessary disruption of public services which would unreasonably impact the remainder of the city; 
(5)  The application contains incomplete or false information; and 
(6)  The producer fails to comply with any terms required by this article. 
(b)  Reasons for revocation of a special events permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  False or incomplete information on the application; 
(2)  Failure to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit; 
(3)  Failure to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance or bonds to the city; and 
(4)  Existence of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency as the city determines, in its sole discretion, to be an impact upon the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Further, a special event permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the city, if the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire department, or their designees, determines that the health, welfare, or safety of the public may be endangered. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 50-115. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any producer whose special event permit application has been denied or revoked may request in writing a review of this decision by the city manager. This request must be in writing and received by the city manager within five days of the permit denial or revocation. 
(b)  The city manager shall review the application and reasons for the denial or revocation of the special event permit and shall issue a decision, within five days, whether to uphold or reverse the previous decision and grant or reinstate the permit with such additional conditions as the city manager may deem justified by the evidence. 
(c)  Should the producer be dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager, an appeal may be filed with the city council within five days of the decision of the city manager. The council shall set a hearing date within 30 days of receiving an appeal. At the hearing, evidence may be submitted by the producer addressing why the permit should have been granted or not revoked and by the city manager addressing why the permit was denied or revoked. The city council shall determine whether the denial or revocation of the permit is justified, or it may reverse the previous decision and grant or reinstate the permit with such additional conditions as deemed justified by the evidence. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02-03 , § I, 2-6-2018) 
Secs. 50-116—50-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-135—50-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES 

Sec. 50-150. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Administrative review means review by the city, including city staff, of an application to determine whether the issuance of a permit is in conformity with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
Antenna means: 
(1)  Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services or other wireless communications; or 
(2)  Communications equipment similar to equipment described in subsection (1) of this paragraph used for the transmission, reception, or transmission and reception of surface waves. 
Such term shall not include television broadcast antennas, antennas designed for amateur radio use, or satellite dishes for residential or household purposes. 
Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization to the extent such codes have been adopted by the state or the city or are otherwise applicable in the city. 
Applicant means any person that submits an application. 
Application means a written request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to: 
(1)  Collocate a small wireless facility in a right-of-way; or 
(2)  Install, modify, or replace a pole or decorative pole in a right-of-way on which a small wireless facility is or will be collocated. 
Attachment agreement means an agreement between the wireless infrastructure provider and the owner of a pole owned by an entity other than the wireless infrastructure provider authorizing the attachment of small wireless facilities to the pole. 
City pole means a pole owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf of the city. 
City means the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
Code means the Sandy Springs Code of Ordinances. 
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, modify, or replace a small wireless facility on or adjacent to a pole, decorative pole, or support structure. 
Communications facility means the set of equipment and network components, including wires and cables and associated equipment and network components, used by a communications service provider to provide communications services. 
Communications service provider means a provider of communications services. 
Communications services means cable service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(6); telecommunications service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(53); information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24), as each such term existed on January 1, 2019; or wireless services. 
Consolidated application means an application for the collocation of multiple small wireless facilities on existing poles or support structures or for the installation, modification, or replacement of multiple poles and the collocation of associated small wireless facilities. 
Decorative pole means a city pole that is specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes. 
Eligible facilities request means an eligible facilities request as set forth in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(3), as it existed on January 1, 2019. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States. 
Fee means a one-time, nonrecurring charge based on time and expense. 
Historic district means: 
(1)  Any district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic Places maintained by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i-v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified by 47 C.F.R. Part 1; 
(2)  Any area designated as a historic district under article 2 of chapter 10 of title 44, the 'Georgia Historic Preservation Act'; or 
(3)  Any area designated as a historic district or property by law prior to October 1, 2019. 
Law means and includes any and all federal, state, or local laws, statutes, common laws, codes, rules, regulations, orders, or ordinances. 
Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
O.C.G.A. means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Permit means a written authorization, in electronic or hard copy format, required to be issued by the city to initiate, continue, or complete the collocation of a small wireless facility or the installation, modification, or replacement of a pole or decorative pole upon which a small wireless facility is collocated. 
Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization. 
Pole means a vertical pole such as a utility, lighting, traffic, or similar pole made of wood, concrete, metal, or other material that is lawfully located or to be located within a right-of-way, including without limitation a replacement pole and a city pole. Such term shall not include a support structure, decorative pole, or electric transmission structure. 
Rate means a recurring charge. 
Reconditioning work means the activities associated with substantially painting, reconditioning, improving, or repairing city poles. 
Replace, replacement, or replacing means to replace a pole or decorative pole with a new pole or a new decorative pole, similar in design, size, and scale to the existing pole or decorative pole consistent with 47 C.F.R. 1.40001(b)(7) as it existed on January 1, 2019, in order to address limitations of, or change requirements applicable to, the existing pole to structurally support the collocation of a small wireless facility. 
Replacement work means the activities associated with replacing a city pole. 
Right-of-way means, generally, property or any interest therein, whether or not in the form of a strip, which is acquired for or devoted to a public road. For the purposes of this article, public road means a highway, road, street, avenue, toll road, tollway, drive, detour, or other way that either is open to the public or has been acquired as right-of-way, and is intended to be used for enjoyment by the public and for the passage of vehicles in the city, including but not limited to the following public rights, structures, sidewalks, facilities, and appurtenances incidental to the construction, maintenance, and enjoyment of such rights-of-way: 
(1)  Surface, shoulders, and sides; 
(2)  Bridges; 
(3)  Causeways; 
(4)  Viaducts; 
(5)  Ferries; 
(6)  Overpasses; 
(7)  Underpasses; 
(8)  Railroad grade crossings; 
(9)  Tunnels; 
(10)  Signs, signals, markings, or other traffic control devices; 
(11)  Wayside parks; 
(12)  Parking facilities; 
(13)  Drainage ditches; 
(14)  Canals and culverts; 
(15)  Rest areas; and 
(16)  Truck-weighing stations or check points. 
Small wireless facility means radio transceivers; surface wave couplers; antennas; coaxial, fiber optic, or other cabling; power supply; backup batteries; and comparable and associated equipment, regardless of technological configuration, at a fixed location or fixed locations that enable communication or surface wave communication between user equipment and a communications network and that meet both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each wireless provider's antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, measured based upon the exterior dimensions of height by width by depth of any enclosure that may be used. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of the volume of all other wireless equipment associated with any such facility: 
a.  Electric meters; 
b.  Concealment elements; 
c.  Telecommunications demarcation boxes; 
d.  Grounding equipment; 
e.  Power transfer switches; 
f.  Cut-off switches; and 
g.  Vertical cable runs for connection of power and other services. 
Such term shall not include a pole, decorative pole, or support structure on, under, or within which the equipment is located or collocated or to which the equipment is attached and shall not include any wireline backhaul facilities or coaxial, fiber optic, or other cabling that is between small wireless facilities, poles, decorative poles, or support structures or that is not otherwise immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Support structure means a building, billboard, water tank, or any other structure to which a small wireless facility is or may be attached. Such term shall not include a decorative pole, electric transmission structure, or pole. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person, including a person authorized to provide telecommunications services in this state, that builds, installs, or operates small wireless facilities, poles, decorative poles, or support structures on which small wireless facilities are or are intended to be used for collocation but that is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services means any services provided to the public using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile. 
Wireless services provider means a person that provides wireless services. 
Wireline backhaul facility means an aboveground or underground wireline facility used to transport communications data from a small wireless facility network interface device to a network. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-151. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to provide policies and procedures for the placement of small wireless facilities in certain rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city, which will provide a public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights-of-way and the city as a whole. The chapter shall not be construed to address the permitting of small wireless facilities outside of the rights-of-way, either on private property or other publicly-owned property. The city shall regulate the placement of small wireless facilities on private property through provisions in its zoning and building codes. 
(b)  It is the intent of this chapter to facilitate the rapid deployment of small cell facilities to provide the citizens with the benefits of advanced wireless services. 
(c)  It is the intent of this chapter to establish uniform standards associated with the small wireless facilities including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways, poles, and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevent visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Prevent interference with other facilities and operations of facilities lawfully located in city rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)  Protection against environmental damage, including damage to trees or shrubbery including, but not limited to, those items planted pursuant to city landscaping, zoning, tree preservation, or other city policies; 
(5)  Preservation of the property values of neighborhoods in which small wireless facilities are installed or proposed; 
(6)  Preservation of the character of historic structures including but not limited to such structures or neighborhoods listed on the National Register of Historic Places and/or local historic preservation districts or historic districts; 
(7)  Preservation of public rights-of-way and areas with underground utility facilities where small wireless facilities would be cost prohibitive and aesthetically incompatible; 
(8)  Preservation of public rights-of-way with insufficient space to accommodate small wireless facilities; and 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-152. - Conflicts with other ordinances. 
To the extent this division may conflict with other ordinances of the city, this chapter shall supersede all other ordinances, except that any facilities permitted under this section shall also comply with any other provisions of this Code regarding utility undergrounding requirements to the extent allowed by law. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-153. - Permitted use; application process. 
(a)  A wireless provider may collocate small wireless facilities on city poles and decorative poles in the right-of-way, subject to administrative review and the issuance of a permit as set forth in this Code section. Subject to administrative review and the issuance of a permit as set forth in this Code section, provided that such uses shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter, including without limitation, those set forth in Code section 50-155, a wireless provider may occupy the right-of-way for the following uses: 
(1)  Collocation of a small wireless facility on or adjacent to a pole or a support structure that does not exceed the limitations set forth in Code section 50-154(h)(3) or on or adjacent to a decorative pole in compliance with Code section 50-158; and 
(2)  Installation, modification, or replacement of a pole or a decorative pole for collocation of a small wireless facility that does not exceed the limitations set forth in Code section 50-154(h)(1) and (2). 
(b)  No wireless provider shall collocate any small wireless facility in the right-of-way or install, modify, or replace a pole or decorative pole for collocation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way without first filing an application and obtaining a permit therefor. Any failure to comply with this subsection by a wireless provider shall allow the city, in its sole discretion, to restore the right-of-way, to the extent practicable in the reasonable judgment of the city, to its condition prior to the unpermitted collocation or installation and to charge the responsible wireless provider its reasonable, documented cost of doing so, plus a penalty of $1,000.00. The city may suspend the ability of the wireless provider to receive any new permits from the city until the wireless provider has paid the amount assessed for such restoration costs and the penalty assessed, if any; provided, however, that the city shall not suspend such ability of any applicant that has deposited the amount in controversy in escrow pending an adjudication of the merits of the dispute by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  All applicants that have not previously held a meeting that complies with this Code section shall meet with the city at least 30 days before submitting applications under this chapter to inform the city in good faith when such applicant expects to commence deployment of small wireless facilities and poles within the city pursuant to this chapter, the number of small wireless facilities and poles it expects to deploy during the 24 months after commencement, and the expected timing of such deployments. 
(d)  Open Records Act. Any small wireless facility applications for permits filed pursuant to this section shall be in electronic form as required by the city. All records received in connection with the permit shall be handled by the city in accordance with the state Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(1)  The applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain trade secrets or other proprietary or confidential information "confidential under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72" by submitting with it an affidavit affirmatively declaring that specific information in the records constitute trade secrets as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72. The applicant shall be solely responsible for clearly identifying and labeling as "confidential" or "proprietary" any such confidential material (including, if requested by the city, submission of an affirmative affidavit regarding such confidential and/or proprietary information) which it asserts is exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72 of the Open Records Act or any other applicable law. However, applicants are advised that such designations on any such confidential material shall not be binding on the city or determinative of any issue relating to confidentiality. 
(2)  In no event shall the city or any of their respective agents, representatives, consultants, directors, officers or employees be liable to applicant for the disclosure of all or a portion of any such confidential material or other information pursuant to a request under the Open Records Act. 
(3)  If the city receives a request for public disclosure of all or any portion of any confidential material identified as "confidential" or "proprietary" by applicant, the city will endeavor to notify applicant of the request in sufficient time to allow applicant to review such request and take whatever action it shall deem appropriate to protect any such confidential material; provided, however, that the city must comply with the deadlines for responding in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71, and that applicant shall bear the sole responsibility for the costs and expenses of all such actions seeking to protect the confidential material. Among others, applicant may seek a protective order or other appropriate remedy. If the applicant or the city determines in good faith that the confidential material identified as "confidential" or "proprietary" is not exempt from disclosure under the Open Records Act, then, unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city will release the requested information. In the absence of a protective or other similar order rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city shall make the final determination regarding whether the requested confidential material is to be disclosed or withheld. Applicant shall be liable for any costs incurred by the city associated with an action seeking to protect confidential material. If such costs are incurred, the city shall notify applicant in writing of the amount due, and applicant shall have 30 days from the date of the notice to reimburse the city. 
(e)  The permit application shall be made by the wireless infrastructure provider, or its duly-authorized agent as noted in a notarized statement from a person with the wireless infrastructure provider, who represents authority to make such an authorization, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and email address, including emergency contact information for the applicant; 
(2)  The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the filing of the application; 
(3)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the proposed facility. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the physical work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the physical work proposed; 
(4)  Detailed construction drawings regarding the proposed use of the right-of-way; 
(5)  To the extent the proposed facility involves collocation on a pole, decorative pole, or support structure, a structural report performed by a duly licensed engineer evidencing that the pole, decorative pole, or support structure will structurally support the collocation, or that the pole, decorative pole, or support structure may and will be modified to meet structural requirements, in accordance with applicable codes; 
(6)  For any new aboveground facilities, visual depictions or representations if such are not included in the construction drawings; 
(7)  Information indicating the horizontal and approximate vertical location, relative to the boundaries of the right-of-way, of the small wireless facility for which the application is being submitted; 
(8)  If the application is for the installation of a pole or replacement of a decorative pole, a certification that complies with subsection (h) of this Code section; 
(9)  If the small wireless facility will be collocated on a pole or support structure owned by a third party, other than a city pole or a decorative pole, a certification that the wireless provider has permission from the owner to collocate on the pole or support structure. The city may require the applicant to provide additional information, including an attachment agreement or other document demonstrating the applicant's legal right to place the facility on the structure. Any permit issued under this section shall be effective and conditioned upon the applicant's demonstration of compliance with this subsection; and 
(10)  If the applicant is not a wireless services provider, a certification that a wireless services provider has requested in writing that the applicant collocate the small wireless facilities or install, modify, or replace the pole or decorative pole at the requested location. 
(f)  The city shall not require a wireless provider to obtain a permit or any other approval or require fees or rates for the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables or power lines that are strung between poles or support structures in the right-of-way in compliance with applicable codes; provided, however, the city may require a wireless provider to obtain permits for any additional activities such as electrical work, excavation, or closure of sidewalks or vehicular lanes within the right-of-way if otherwise required by generally applicable law. Such permits shall be issued on a nondiscriminatory basis upon terms and conditions applied to any other person's similar activities in the right-of-way. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to allow the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities on such cables or power lines without the agreement, authorization, or permission of the person that owns, manages, or controls such cables or power lines. 
(g)  Any material change to information contained in an application shall be submitted in writing to the city within 30 days after the events necessitating the change. 
(h)  Unless otherwise provided by applicable law, all applications pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by the fees required under Code section 50-161. 
(i)  A wireless provider shall not apply to install a pole or replace a decorative pole unless it has determined after diligent investigation that it cannot meet the service objectives of the permit by collocating on an existing pole or support structure on which: 
(1)  The wireless provider has the right to collocate subject to reasonable terms and conditions; and 
(2)  Such collocation would not impose technical limitations or significant additional costs. The wireless provider shall certify that it has made such a determination in good faith, based on the assessment of a licensed engineer, and shall provide a written summary of the basis for such determination. 
(j)  Interference with public safety, utility or public works equipment. Small wireless facilities and wireless attachments shall be operated and maintained in a manner that does not interfere with public safety, utility or public works equipment. 
(k)  Existing utility easements. Applicants will coordinate with the city engineer to protect existing utilities in the public ROW and public utility easements, including all public safety considerations prior to and during installation to ensure public safety response in the case of gas line, water line or electricity disturbance. 
(l)  The provisions of this chapter concerning the collocation of small wireless facilities on poles and the installation, modification, and replacement of poles by wireless providers apply only to poles that are lawfully located or are to be lawfully located within the right-of-way. 
(m)  A permit for the placement of small wireless facilities within the city rights-of-way may include a provision reasonably addressing the obligations of the parties if there is a substantial change of law at the federal, state, or local level. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-154. - Action on permit application. 
(a)  The requirements of this Code section govern the city's review of applications for uses that are subject to administrative review as described in Code section 50-153(a). 
(b)  Within 20 days of receipt of a written application, the city shall: 
(1)  Notify the applicant in writing of the commencement and completion dates of any widening, repair, reconstruction, or relocation of the applicable right-of-way that is scheduled to commence, or is anticipated in good faith to commence, within 24 months after the application is filed; 
(2)  Notify the applicant, based on the city's good faith preliminary review of the information provided in the application, of any aspect of the application that appears to be grounds for the city's denial of the application pursuant to subsection (j) of this Code section; and 
(3)  Determine whether the application is complete and inform the applicant of its determination in writing. If the city determines that an application is incomplete, it shall specifically identify to the applicant in writing all missing information within such 20-day period; otherwise the application is deemed complete. If the city identifies missing information to the applicant as provided in this paragraph, the applicant may submit such missing information to the city within 20 days of receipt of notification in writing from the city that the application is incomplete without paying any additional application fee, and any subsequent review of the application by the city for completeness shall be limited to the previously identified missing information. If the city determines that an application remains incomplete, or if the city determines that the applicant has made material changes to the application other than to address the missing information identified by the city, the city shall notify the applicant of such determination in writing within ten days of receipt of the resubmission of the written application, and absent an agreement to the contrary between the city and the applicant that is confirmed by email or other writing, such notice shall constitute a denial of the application. If the city does not provide such written notification to the applicant within this ten-day period, the application shall be deemed complete. 
(c)  The city shall make its final decision to approve or deny the application within 30 days of the written determination that the application is complete or when the application is deemed complete under paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of this Code section, whichever is earlier, for a collocation, and within 70 days of the written determination that the application is complete or when the application is deemed complete under paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of this Code section, whichever is earlier, for the installation, modification, or replacement of a pole or decorative pole. 
(d)  A decision to deny an application pursuant to this Code section shall be in writing, shall identify all reasons for the denial, and shall identify the provisions of applicable codes or other standards applicable pursuant to this chapter on which the denial was based. The decision to deny shall be sent to the applicant contemporaneously. The review period shall run until the written decision is delivered to the applicant in accordance with subsection (s) of this Code section. 
(e)  If the city fails to act on an application within the review period provided for in subsections (c) and (d) of this Code section, the applicant may provide the city written notice that the time period for acting has lapsed, and the city shall then have 20 days after receipt of such notice to render its written decision. The application shall be deemed approved by passage of time and operation of law if the city does not render its written decision within such 20 days. 
(f)  An applicant may, at the applicant's discretion and subject to the consolidated application requirements and processes under subsections (t) and (u) of Code section 50-154, file a consolidated application. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter and to the extent that an application constitutes an eligible facilities request for modification of an eligible support structure that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such structure, the city shall not deny the application and shall approve the application within 60 days according to the procedures established under 47 C.F.R. 1.40001(c). 
(h)  Small wireless facilities and new, modified, or replacement poles to be used for collocation of small wireless facilities may be placed in the right-of-way as a permitted use in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, subject to applicable codes and the following requirements: 
(1)  Each such new, modified, or replacement pole installed in the right-of-way in a historic district and in an area zoned primarily for residential use shall not exceed 50 feet above ground level; 
(2)  Each such new, modified, or replacement pole installed in the right-of-way not in historic district or in an area zoned primarily for residential use shall not exceed the greater of: 
a.  Fifty feet above ground level; or 
b.  Ten feet greater in height above ground level than the tallest existing pole in the same city right-of-way in place as of January 1, 2019, and located within 500 feet of the new proposed pole; and 
(3)  New small wireless facilities in the right-of-way shall not exceed: 
a.  For a collocation on an existing pole or support structure, more than ten feet above the existing pole or support structure; or 
b.  For a collocation on a new, modified, or replacement pole under paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection, the height limit provided in such paragraphs. 
(i)  (1)  A wireless provider shall be required to comply with the provisions of the city's underground ordinance that prohibits communications service providers and electric service providers from installing poles in a right-of-way in an area designated solely for underground or buried facilities of communications service providers and electric service providers where the city: 
a.  Has required all such facilities other than light poles and attachments to be placed underground and all such undergrounding has been completed prior to the submission of the application, or, for rights-of-way where such facilities other than light poles and attachments have not been deployed, has in effect a reasonable and nondiscriminatory zoning or development ordinance or regulation that requires such facilities other than light poles and attachments to be placed underground; 
b.  Does not prohibit the replacement of light poles or the collocation of small wireless facilities in the designated area; and 
c.  Permits wireless providers to seek a waiver of the underground requirements for the placement of a new pole to support small wireless facilities where the underground requirements would effectively inhibit the provision of wireless services, which waivers shall be addressed in a nondiscriminatory manner and consistent with applicable law. 
(2)  In areas designated solely for underground or buried facilities of communications service providers and electric service providers where small wireless facilities have been installed prior to the date of such designation by the city, the city shall: 
a.  Allow a wireless provider to maintain in place any previously collocated small wireless facilities subject to any applicable pole attachment agreement; or 
b.  Either allow the wireless provider to replace the pole associated with previously collocated small wireless facilities at the same location or propose an alternate location within 50 feet of the prior location, which the wireless provider shall use unless such alternate location imposes technical limits or significant additional costs. 
(j)  The city shall approve an application for permitted uses described in Code section 50-153(a) unless the requested collocation of a small wireless facility or the requested installation, modification, or replacement of a pole or decorative pole: 
(1)  Interferes with the operation of traffic control equipment; 
(2)  Interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation or pedestrians; 
(3)  Fails to comply with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq., or similar laws of general applicability regarding pedestrian access or movement; 
(4)  Requests that ground-mounted small wireless facility equipment be located more than 7.5 feet in radial circumference from the base of the pole, decorative pole, or support structure to which the small wireless facility antenna would be attached, provided that the city shall not deny the application if a greater distance from the base of the pole, decorative pole, or support structure is necessary to avoid interfering with sight lines or clear zones for transportation or pedestrians or to otherwise protect public safety; 
(5)  Fails to comply with applicable codes; 
(6)  Fails to comply with the maximum limitations set forth in subsection (h) of this Code section; 
(7)  With respect to an application to install a pole or decorative pole, interferes with the widening, repair, reconstruction, or relocation of a public road or highway by the city or the department of transportation that has been advertised for bid and scheduled for completion within six months after the application is filed; 
(8)  With respect to an application to install a pole or decorative pole, interferes with a public works construction project governed by O.C.G.A. chapter 91 of title 36 and scheduled for completion within six months after the application is filed; 
(9)  Fails to comply with Code sections 50-156, 50-157, or 50-158; 
(10)  Fails to comply with laws of general applicability that address pedestrian and vehicular traffic and safety requirements; or 
(11)  Fails to comply with laws of general applicability that address the occupancy or management of the right-of-way and that are not otherwise inconsistent with this chapter. 
(k)  (1)  A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter and shall not create a property right or grant authorization or license to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of other persons that may already have an interest in the right-of-way. 
(2)  Collocation, installation, modification, or replacement for which a permit is issued under this chapter shall be completed within six months after issuance, provided that an extension shall be granted for up to an additional six months upon written request made to the city before the end of the initial six-month period if a delay results from circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the applicant. Issuance of a permit authorizes the applicant to: 
a.  Undertake the collocation, installation, modification, or replacement approved by the permit; and 
b.  Operate and maintain the small wireless facilities and any associated pole covered by the permit for a period of not less than ten years, which shall be renewed for equivalent durations so long as the applicant is in compliance with the criteria set forth in subsection (j) of this Code section, subject to the relocation requirements described in subsection (l) of this Code section and the applicant's right to terminate at any time. 
(l)  If, in the reasonable exercise of police powers, the city requires widening, repair, reconstruction, or relocation of a public road or highway, or relocation of poles, support structures, or small wireless facilities is required as a result of a public project, a wireless provider shall relocate poles and support structures that such wireless provider has installed in the right-of-way for the collocation of small wireless facilities pursuant to this chapter at no cost to the city in the event that such poles and support structures are found by the city to unreasonably interfere with the widening, repair, reconstruction, or relocation project or the public project. If widening, repair, reconstruction, or relocation is required as a condition or result of a project by a person other than the city, such person shall bear the cost of relocating such poles or support structures. The wireless provider shall relocate the poles or support structures: 
(1)  By the date designated in a written notice from the city that contains a good faith estimate by the city of the date by which the city intends to commence work, whenever the city has determined that such removal, relocation, change, or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement or operations in or upon the right-of-way so long as the same time frames are applied to all utilities in the right-of-way; provided, however, that the date designated for relocation shall be at least 45 days after the city provides the written notice to the wireless provider; or 
(2)  Within the time frame that the wireless provider estimates in good faith is reasonably needed to complete the relocation, so long as the wireless provider provides the city written notice of its good faith estimate within 30 days following receipt of the written notice provided by the city pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection and explains in detail why such wireless provider cannot reasonably complete the relocation by the date designated in the city's written notice. 
(m)  (1)  The wireless provider shall reasonably cooperate with the city to carry out reconditioning work activities in a manner that minimizes interference with the wireless provider's approved use of the facility. 
(2)  The city shall use reasonable efforts to provide the wireless provider with written notice of reconditioning work at least 120 days before such reconditioning work begins. Upon receiving such notice, it shall be the wireless provider's sole responsibility to provide adequate measures to cover, remove, or otherwise protect the wireless provider's communications facility from the consequences of the reconditioning work, including but not limited to paint and debris fallout. The city reserves the right to require the wireless provider to remove all of the wireless provider's communications facilities from the city pole and surrounding premises during reconditioning work, provided that the requirement to remove such is contained in the written notice required by this Code section. All costs associated with the protection measures, including temporary removal, shall be the sole responsibility of the wireless provider. If the city fails in good faith to give notice within at least 120 days, it shall not affect the city's rights under this subsection. In all cases, as much notice as possible shall be provided, but less than 30 days' notice shall be prohibited. The city shall provide the wireless provider with a date by which its equipment must be protected or removed. 
(3)  The wireless provider may request a modification of the city procedures for carrying out reconditioning work in order to reduce interference with the wireless provider's operation of its communications facility. If the city agrees to the modification, the wireless provider shall be responsible for all reasonable incremental costs related to the modification. 
(4)  The city shall provide the wireless provider with at least 120 days' written notice of any replacement work before the city may remove the wireless provider's communications facilities. The city shall also promptly notify the wireless provider when the city poles have been replaced and the wireless provider can reinstall its equipment. During the replacement work, the wireless provider may maintain a temporary communications facility on the property, or after approval by the city on any land owned or controlled by the city in the vicinity of the property. If the property will not accommodate the wireless provider's temporary communications facility or if the parties cannot agree on a temporary location, the wireless provider, at its sole discretion, shall have the right to suspend the applicable permit until the replacement pole is installed, upon 30 days' written notice to the city. 
(n)  For any collocation on city poles in the right-of-way, the city shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the city pole to support the proposed facility, including replacement of the pole if necessary, within 60 days after receipt of a completed application requesting attachment to the city pole. Alternatively, the city may require the wireless provider to perform the make-ready work and notify the wireless provider of such within the 60-day period. If the wireless provider or its contractor performs the make-ready work, the wireless provider shall indemnify the city for any negligence by the wireless provider or its contractor in the performance of such make-ready work, the work shall not be deemed to violate O.C.G.A. chapter 91 of title 36, and the work shall otherwise comply with applicable law. If the city opts to perform the make-ready work itself, the city shall complete the work, including any pole replacement, within 90 days of receipt of written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the wireless provider. Such acceptance shall be signified by payment via check or other commercially reasonable and customary means specified by the city. The city may require that the replacement city pole have the same functionality as the pole being replaced. If the city pole is replaced, the city shall operate city fixtures on the pole, and, absent an agreement to the contrary between the city and the wireless provider that is confirmed in writing, the city shall take ownership of the new pole. 
(o)  If the wireless provider fails to relocate a support structure or pole or fails to provide a written good faith estimate of the time needed to relocate a support structure or pole within the time period prescribed in subsection (l) of this Code section, the city shall have the right and privilege, ten days or more after the wireless provider receives written notice from the city, to cut power to or move any support structure or pole located within the right-of-way, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in order to commence work on the public project. 
(p)  (1)  If a wireless provider decides to abandon any small wireless facility, support structure, or pole, it shall notify the city in writing as soon as practicable, but no later than 30 days prior to the abandonment. Following receipt of such notice, the city shall instruct the wireless provider in writing to remove all or any portion of the small wireless facility, support structure, or pole if the city determines that such removal will be in the best interest of public safety and welfare. If the wireless provider fails to remove the abandoned small wireless facility, support structure, or pole within 90 days after such notice, the city may do so and recover the actual and reasonable expenses of doing so from the wireless provider, its successors, or its assigns, plus a penalty of $500.00. The city may suspend the ability of the wireless provider, its successors, or its assigns, as applicable, to receive any new permits from the city until the wireless provider, its successors, or its assigns, as applicable, have paid the amount assessed for such removal costs and the penalty assessed, if any; provided, however, that the city shall not suspend such ability of any applicant that has deposited the amount in controversy in escrow pending an adjudication of the merits of the dispute by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  A small wireless facility that is not operated or a support structure or pole that is not utilized for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such small wireless facility, support structure, or pole shall remove such within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the city notifying such owner of such small wireless facility, support structure, or pole of the abandonment. The city shall send the notice by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to such owner at the last known address of such owner of the small wireless facility, support structure, or pole. If the owner does not provide written notice that the small wireless facility has not been out of operation or the support structure or pole has in fact been utilized for a continuous period of 12 months or does not remove such small wireless facility, support structure, or pole within the 90-day period, the city may remove or cause the removal of such small wireless facility, support structure, or pole pursuant to the terms of its support structure or pole attachment agreement for city poles or through actions provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. 
(q)  If the city determines that a wireless provider's activity in a right-of-way pursuant to this chapter creates an imminent risk to public safety, the city may provide written notice to the wireless provider and demand that the wireless provider address such risk. If the wireless provider fails to reasonably address the risk within 24 hours of the written notice, the city may take or cause to be taken action to reasonably address such risk and charge the wireless provider the reasonable documented cost of such actions. 
(r)  The city may require a wireless provider to repair all damage to a right-of-way directly caused by the activities of the wireless provider, while occupying, installing, repairing, or maintaining small wireless facilities, poles, or support structures, in such right-of-way and to restore the right-of-way to its condition before the damage occurred pursuant to the competitively neutral and reasonable requirements and specifications of the city. If the wireless provider fails to return the right-of-way, to the extent practicable in the reasonable judgment of the city, to its condition prior to the damage within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the city, the city may, at the sole discretion of the city, restore the right-of-way to such condition and charge the wireless provider its reasonable, documented cost of doing so, plus a penalty of $500.00. The city may suspend the ability of the wireless provider to receive any new permits from the city until the wireless provider has paid the amount assessed for such restoration costs and the penalty assessed, if any; provided, however, that the city shall not suspend such ability of any applicant that has deposited the amount in controversy in escrow pending an adjudication of the merits of the dispute by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(s)  The city shall send any notice or decision required by this Code section by registered or certified mail, statutory overnight delivery, hand delivery, or email transmission. The decision or notice shall be deemed delivered upon email transmission, deposit into overnight mail or regular mail receptacle with adequate postage paid, or actual receipt if delivered by hand. 
(t)  An applicant seeking to construct, modify or replace a network of small wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application for up to five small wireless facilities and receive a single permit for such multiple small wireless facilities; provided, however, the denial of one or more small wireless facilities in a consolidated application shall not delay processing of any other small wireless facilities in the same consolidated application. While an applicant has applications, including consolidated applications, pending before the city for review of 15 or more new poles and the collocation of associated small wireless facilities, the city may toll the processing requirements under this section 50-154 for any application subsequently submitted by the same applicant for the placement of new poles and the collocation of associated small wireless facilities; and 
(u)  An applicant seeking to collocate a small wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application for up to 15 small wireless facilities and receive a single permit for such multiple small wireless facilities; provided, however, the denial of one or more small wireless facilities in a consolidated application shall not delay processing of any other small wireless facilities in the same consolidated application. While an applicant has applications, including consolidated applications, pending before the city for review of 45 or more sites for the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing poles or support structures, the city may toll the processing requirements under this section 50-154 for any application subsequently submitted by the same applicant for the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing poles or support structures. 
(v)  When the processing of an application is tolled pursuant to subsection (t) or (u) of this section, the application is no longer counted as pending. As processing of applications is completed, the city shall begin processing previously tolled applications in the order in which they were submitted, unless the applicant specifies a different order. 
(w)  Appeal. Any appeal of a decision rendered pursuant to this article section shall be made by Writ of Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-155. - Standard of care. 
(a)  An applicant in the right-of-way shall employ due care during the installation and maintenance process and shall comply with all safety and right-of-way protection requirements of general applicability set forth in applicable law. 
(b)  An applicant in the right-of-way shall not place any small wireless facilities, support structures, poles, or decorative poles where they will interfere with any existing infrastructure or equipment and shall locate its lines and equipment in such a manner as not to interfere unnecessarily with the usual vehicular or pedestrian traffic patterns or with the rights or reasonable convenience of owners of property that abuts any right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-156. - Historic districts. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, within a historic district, an applicant may collocate a small wireless facility and may place or replace a pole, only upon satisfaction of the following: 
(1)  The issuance of a permit under Code section 50-153(a); and 
(2)  a.  Compliance with any objective, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory aesthetic and structural requirements that have been made publicly available in writing by the city at least 30 days prior to submission of the application; provided, however, that any such requirements may not have the effect of materially inhibiting any wireless provider's technology or service, and compliance with any such requirements shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size restrictions in the definition of small wireless facility; or 
b.  In the absence of any such requirements, a replacement pole shall be substantially similar in height and appearance to the pole being replaced. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-157. - Areas zoned for residential use. 
For applications for new poles in the right-of-way in areas zoned for residential use, the city may propose an alternate location in the right-of-way within 100 feet of the location set forth in the application, and the wireless provider shall use the city's proposed alternate location unless the location imposes technical limits or significant additional costs. The wireless provider shall certify that it has made such a determination in good faith, based on the assessment of a licensed engineer, and it shall provide a written summary of the basis for such determination. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-158. - Decorative poles. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, an applicant may collocate a small wireless facility on a decorative pole, or may replace a decorative pole with a new decorative pole, in the event the existing decorative pole will not structurally support the attachment, only upon satisfaction of the following: 
(1)  The issuance of a permit under Code section 50-151(a); and 
(2)  a.  Compliance with any objective and reasonable aesthetic and structural requirements that have been made publicly available in writing by the city at least 30 days prior to submission of the application; provided, however, that any such requirements shall not have the effect of materially inhibiting any wireless provider's technology or service, and compliance with any such requirements shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size restrictions in the definition of small wireless facility; or 
b.  In the absence of any such requirements, a replacement decorative pole shall be substantially similar in height and appearance to the decorative pole being replaced. 
The city shall operate city fixtures on the replaced decorative pole, and, absent an agreement to the contrary between the city and the wireless provider that is confirmed by email or other writing, the city shall take ownership of the new decorative pole. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-159. - Construction and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Public safety and traffic. Construction and maintenance of small wireless facilities shall be performed in a manner that does not endanger public safety and that minimizes interference with traffic flow. Where permittee must disrupt traffic flow, appropriate safety and traffic flow measures shall be employed to safeguard against accidents and keep traffic moving in an efficient manner subject to all applicable standards and regulations promulgated and/or adopted by the city and the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Construction and maintenance exclusions. The city retains the authority to exclude certain days, holidays and special events periods during which the wireless infrastructure provider may not perform construction or maintenance activities on its small wireless facilities and must be out of the rights-of-way. The public works department may also require that the wireless infrastructure provider and their agents not perform construction or maintenance work during certain times of the day in order to lessen the impact on traffic or otherwise address safety concerns. Such times shall be as approved by the city council or the public works director. Prior to commencing construction or maintenance, the wireless infrastructure provider or its agent must verify that its planned work does not fall into an excluded time period. 
(c)  Compliance with ADA. Any small wireless facilities or associated construction and maintenance activities must comply with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504) (29 U.S.C. § 794) and the Americans with Disabilities Act, (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.). The city shall not be liable for any small wireless facilities or any actions of the wireless infrastructure provider which violate the ADA. If at any time the city determines the right-of-way is not in compliance due to the actions or facilities of the wireless infrastructure provider, the city may, in its sole discretion, request the wireless infrastructure provider to make the appropriate repairs within five days of sending of the notice from the city. If the repairs are not made by the wireless infrastructure provider, the city may perform the repairs on its own and require reimbursement of any expenses associated therewith. When such repairs are made by the city, written notice shall be sent requesting reimbursement upon completion of the repairs, and the wireless infrastructure provider shall have 30 days to reimburse such expenses from the sending of the notice. 
(d)  Small wireless facility installations on all poles shall utilize a concealed design, with all cabling being inside a hollow pole or otherwise hidden from view without banding or external conduit or panduit. 
(e)  All radios, network equipment and batteries will be enclosed inside the pole or on the pole inside a concealment device approved by the city public works department. 
(f)  Any new poles installed shall not leach any volatile organic compounds or toxic materials. 
(g)  Any new poles installed should be constructed in a manner to avoid unsightly rust and corrosion. The finish on the pole should conform to city standards, including selection of color, finish method, such as "baked on" or color that is tightly integrated into the material composition of the pole to prevent color fading or erosion or peeling of paint from the exterior of the pole. 
(h)  Any small wireless facility placed on a city pole shall not interfere with or block any banners or other attachments owned by the city. The small wireless facility shall be aesthetically compatible with the surrounding area through application of camouflage and concealment design techniques. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-160. - Removal, relocation or modification of a small wireless facility in the ROW. 
(a)  Removal. The applicant, or the person that owns or operates the small wireless facility collocated in the right-of-way, may remove its small wireless facilities at any time from the right-of-way upon not less than 30 days' prior written notice to the city and may cease paying to the city any applicable fees and rates for such use, as of the date of the actual removal of the small wireless facilities. In the event of such removal, the right-of-way shall be, to the extent practicable in the reasonable judgment of the city, restored to its condition prior to the removal. If the applicant fails to return the right-of-way, to the extent practicable in the reasonable judgment of the city, to its condition prior to the removal within 90 days of the removal, the city may, at the sole discretion of the city, restore the right-of-way to such condition and charge the applicant the city reasonable, documented cost of removal and restoration, plus a penalty of $500.00. The city may suspend the ability of the applicant to receive any new permits from the city until the applicant has paid the amount assessed for such restoration costs and the penalty assessed, if any; provided, however, that the city shall not suspend such ability of any applicant that has deposited the amount in controversy in escrow pending an adjudication of the merits of the dispute by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right to cut or move or disconnect any small wireless facility located within its rights-of-way as the city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall notify the wireless infrastructure provider and provide it an opportunity to move its own small wireless facility, prior to the city cutting or removing such facility and the city shall notify the wireless infrastructure provider after cutting or removing the small wireless facility. The city shall not be liable for any damages to small wireless facilities or other infrastructure that is cut or removed during such emergencies. When such removal is performed by the city, written notice shall be sent requesting reimbursement after completion of the removal, and the wireless infrastructure provider shall have 30 days to reimburse such expenses after the sending of the notice. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 50-161. - Fees and rates. 
As a condition to the issuance of a permit to collocate a small wireless facility or to install, modify, or replace a pole or a decorative pole for collocation of a small wireless facility in city right-of-way, the applicant shall pay the following fees and rates: 
(1)  A fee for each application for the collocation of each small wireless facility on an existing pole assessed by the city of $100.00 per small wireless facility; 
(2)  A fee for each application for each replacement pole with an associated small wireless facility assessed by the city of $250.00; 
(3)  A fee for each application for each new pole with an associated small wireless facility assessed by the city of $1,000.00 per pole with an associated small wireless facility; 
(4)  An annual right-of-way occupancy rate assessed by the city for nonexclusive occupancy of the right-of-way by the applicant in the following amounts: 
a.  One hundred dollars per year for each small wireless facility collocated on any existing or replacement pole, including an existing or replacement city pole; or 
b.  Two hundred dollars per year for each new pole, other than a replacement pole, with an associated small wireless facility; 
(5)  An annual attachment rate for collocations on city poles of $40.00 per year per small wireless facility, which shall be nondiscriminatory regardless of the services provided by the collocating wireless provider; 
(6)  A fee for make-ready work, as provided in subsection (n) of Code section 50-154; and 
(7)  Generally applicable nondiscriminatory fees for any permit required under generally applicable law; provided, however, that an applicant shall not be required to obtain or pay any fees for a building permit, as the permit issued pursuant to this chapter serves as a building permit for the applicable poles and small wireless facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2019-03-08 , § II, 3-5-2019) 
Chapter 54 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Taxation, § 1.03(b)(37), (b)(38). 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 54-19. - Annually set. 
On or before June 30 of each year, the council shall set the mileage rate and valorem taxes for all real property within the city for ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 1, § 1), 1-3-2006) 
Charter reference— Authority to levy ad valorem taxes, § 1.03(b)(37). 
Sec. 54-20. - Due date. 
The ad valorem taxes due the city shall become due and payable between July 1 and October 15 of each year, any said taxes not paid in full by the last day specified shall, notwithstanding any existing law, be in default, and shall bear interest and penalties, now or hereafter, as provided by law for taxes which are delinquent or in default, and executions are issued therefor, after December 31 of the year in which such taxes became delinquent 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 1, § 2), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-21. - Fines for delinquent payment. 
(a)  Any person failing to return his real property, for tax purposes, on or before April 1 of each year is assessed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of taxes due the city. Said penalty is in addition to the amount of ad valorem taxes due the city and also in addition any costs and interest and interest permitted by law. 
(b)  Partial payments shall not be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 1, § 3), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-22. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
(a)  The duty to collect by levy and sale, or otherwise, for delinquent taxes is hereby imposed upon the deputy city manager as the city tax collector or his designee as issuing officer, and the county sheriff as execution officer. All levies of execution for delinquent taxes are in the name of the city. This duty may be contracted, by the city council, to a third party. 
(b)  It is the duty of the city tax collector or his designee to comply with all provisions of state law applicable to the provision for issuing, sale and transfer of tax executions and laws governing judicial sales and to: 
(1)  Keep a file of all newspapers in which an official advertisement appears; 
(2)  Keep an execution docket in which is entered a full description of all executions; 
(3)  Maintain a book of all sales; 
(4)  Maintain an index to the sales and executions. 
(c)  The city tax collector shall sign all levies, notices, advertisements, and the like in his name for the city. 
(d)  Execution issued in the name of the city for delinquent ad valorem taxes are directed and delivered to the county sheriff, who shall enter the execution upon the docket to be kept in his office and he shall proceed to enforce the collection of the execution in the manner prescribed by law. 
(e)  The city tax collector will issue all fieri facias (fi. fas.) for delinquent taxes and the county sheriff shall execute such fi. fas, under the same procedures provided by law governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal process and remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, §1(ch. 10, art. 1, § 4), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-23. - Assessment of property. 
(a)  The county board of tax assessors is hereby designated to have the responsibility for assessment and valuation of property within the city limits. The city council shall adopt the assessment and valuations made by the county board of tax assessors for all property located within the city limits, as may be established from year to year by the county board of tax assessors. 
(b)  The city council does authorize the tax commissioner of the county to make such adjustments in the collection of individual items of tax, and to make such refunds as may be proper and necessary, by adding to or deducting from the distribution due the city at the next period of accounting, along with stated explanation of the correction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 1, § 5), 1-3-2006) 
State Law reference— Determination of fair market value for county and municipal ad valorem property taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-353. 
Sec. 54-24. - Community redevelopment tax incentive program. 
(a)  Purpose. The existence of real property that is maintained in a blighted condition increases the costs to city budgets by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this mayor and council in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations in O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 61, Urban Redevelopment, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Blighted property, blighted, or blight means any urbanized or developed property that: 
a.  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
1.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structures; or 
2.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; or 
3.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe that the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; or 
4.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq. or environmental contamination to the extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; or 
5.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
6.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
7.  Is conducive to ill heath, transmission of disease, infant mortality or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
b.  Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
c.  Property shall not be deemed blighted for the purpose of this section's increase of ad valorem taxation if the property is a dwelling house which is being used as a primary residence of one or more persons. 
(2)  Building official means a person authorized to enforce provisions of the technical construction codes. 
(3)  Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or through local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
(4)  Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Sandy Springs, a Georgia Municipal Corporation. 
(5)  Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, that is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
(6)  Person means any natural person, corporation, or unincorporated association. 
(7)  Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this section. 
(8)  Structure means anything constructed or erected which has, or the use of which requires, permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, or which is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, the following: buildings, gazebos, signs, billboards, tennis courts, radio and television antennae and satellite dishes (including supporting towers), swimming pools, light fixtures, walls, fences and steps. 
(c)  Levy of increase ad valorem tax on blighted real property. There is hereby levied on all real property within the city that has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven times millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or other provided by general law (all properties that meet this definition will be subject to this section). 
Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the next tax bill cycle which begins July 1 of every year following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and the finance director and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit buildings and structures. 
(d)  Official identification of property maintained in blighted condition. 
(1)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
a.  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed: 
1.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated by ordinance; or 
2.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels that may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this section for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
b.  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspections shall be made and will supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
c.  Following completion of the inspection report, the building official shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this section, and is subject to increase taxation. 
d.  Said inspection report and supporting documents will be reviewed by the city manager for confirmation and approval of all findings and recommendations by the building official and concurrence that the property identified meets the definition of blighted area as defined under this section. At that point, the mayor and city council shall be notified in writing of the determination of blighted condition. 
e.  The building official shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Fulton County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon and parties in interest; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(2)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes and parties in interest shall notify such person and parties in interest of the building official's determination that the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person and parties in interest of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the building official's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons and parties in interest notified that the real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request an appeal hearing before the mayor and city council. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the building official and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for appeal hearing, the building official shall notify the city manager. 
(3)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the building official shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the person(s) and/or parties in interest requesting the hearing and the city manager. A notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisement appears in Fulton County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(4)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this section. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) or parties in interest requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the mayor and city council shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the mayor and city council shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall be served upon the City of Sandy Springs Finance Director and the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(5)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the mayor and city council affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Fulton County for a writ of certiorari, within 30 days of issuance of the city council's written determination. 
(e)  Remediation or redevelopment to remove designation of blighted condition. 
(1)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property that has been officially designated pursuant to this section as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
a.  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's building official and community development director that addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; and 
b.  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to section 34-51, article III of chapter 34 of the Code of Sandy Springs, Georgia; and 
c.  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this section) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(2)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector, who by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County. 
(3)  All corrective action plans shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the building official and community development director, and contain the following: 
a.  The corrective action plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for that area. 
b.  The corrective action plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property. 
c.  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements. 
d.  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources that will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; and 
e.  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work. 
(f)  Decreased rate of taxation to be applied after successful remedial action or redevelopment of blighted property. Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.25 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $40,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than two successive years. 
(1)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(g)  Duty of public officer to provide notice to county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the City of Sandy Springs Finance Director and Fulton County Tax Commissioner in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street, address and tax map, land lot and tax parcel number, as assigned by the Fulton County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increase or reduced ad valorem taxation under this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-12-39 , § I, 12-15-2015) 
Secs. 54-25—54-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local hotel-motel taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 54-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guestroom means a room, lodging, or accommodation occupied or intended for occupancy by one or more occupants but does not mean a meeting room that is intended, designed, or used for meetings. 
Hotel means a structure or any portion of a structure, including, but not limited to, rooming or lodginghouses, inns, motels, motor hotels and courts, hotels, cabins, public or private clubs, and tourist camps, which contain guestrooms which are regularly furnished for value to the public. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any guestroom in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishing of services or accommodations that accompany the use or possession of a guestroom in a hotel. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses or possesses or has the right to use or possess a guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, contract, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or other entity operating the premises. 
Rent means the consideration received for the occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel whether received in money, property, services, or credits. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 2, § 1), 1-3-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2. 
Sec. 54-51. - Tax imposed; exceptions. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(5), there is imposed, assessed, and levied, and there is paid an excise tax of seven percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city. The tax is paid on any occupancy after December 1, 2005, within the city limits. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to charges or transactions excluded or exempted from the tax by state law. 
(c)  Operators collecting the hotel-motel tax imposed by this article shall be allowed a reimbursement, in the form of a deduction, for collecting, submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 2, § 2), 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 2010-05-18, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 54-52. - Operator registration; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaged in or about to engage in the operating as an operator of a hotel in the city shall register at city hall on a form provided by the city. The failure to register shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the tax. 
(b)  The registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places or business, and other information that would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city may require. The registration is signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or a partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. 
(c)  The city shall, after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration is required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and is prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and to come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. 
(d)  The certificates are nonassignable and nontransferable and are returned immediately to the city manager or his designee, upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 2, § 4), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-53. - Delinquent penalty. 
Any operator who fails to pay the tax to the city on or before the due date shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax not paid plus interest on the unpaid tax at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 2, § 7), 1-3-2006) 
State Law reference— Civil penalties for failure to make returns or pay taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58. 
Sec. 54-54. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  The deputy city manager as the city tax collector shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city tax collector, in conjunction with the city finance director, shall have the power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws or ordinances for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the article and the collection of the tax. 
(c)  Every operator renting guestrooms in a hotel in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or his designee, may require. 
(d)  The city tax collector or any person authorized in writing by the city manager may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, and facilities of any operator renting guestrooms and any operator liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of and return made or to ascertain and determine the amount of tax which should be paid. 
(e)  In administering this article, the city tax collector may require the filing by operators of reports relating to the rental of guestrooms. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 2, § 8), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-55. - Penalties. 
Any operator or person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 . 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 2, § 9), 1-3-2006) 
Secs. 54-56—54-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Excise taxes on rental motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-90 et seq. 

Sec. 54-84. - Definitions. 
The definitions in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-91 apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 1), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-85. - Authority and records. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or designee may require. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 2), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-86. - Excise tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 8, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.), on any motor vehicle rental charge made in the city. The tax levied pursuant to this article is in the amount of three percent of the rental charge. 
(b)  The council declares that the proceeds received from the excise tax levied by this article are to be expedited for use in public safety facilities, including pedestrian sidewalks, installation of traffic lights, street lighting for public safety purposes, and for the maintenance of such systems of traffic lights and streetlights within the territorial city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 3), 1-3-2006) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy and collect excise tax on rental of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93. 
Sec. 54-87. - Exceptions. 
The tax levied by this article is subject to the exemptions and exclusions provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 4), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-88. - Statement required showing gross rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of each month, the motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the city a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the motor vehicle concern shall submit the net taxes due for each particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 6), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-89. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said record is open for inspection and copying by the city manager, or his designee, during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 4, § 7), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-90. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If it appears that a return for excise tax or the amount of tax remitted is inaccurate or incomplete, the city manager or designee may compute and determine the amount required to be paid based on any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One deficiency determination may be made for the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the city manager or designee shall bear interest the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found due by him. 
(c)  The city manager or designee shall give to the rental vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be made personally or by mail and if by mail the service is addressed to the operator or the of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the city manager or designee as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return was filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 8), 1-3-2006) 
State Law reference— Duty to adopt procedures for imposition, payment, and collection of excise taxes on rental motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-95 
Sec. 54-91. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 9), 1-3-2006) 
State Law reference— Information regarding excise taxes on rental motor vehicles to be included in audit report, §§ 36-81-7 and 48-13-96. 
Sec. 54-92. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city manager or designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser is personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 10), 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 54-93. - Penalty; expiration of tax. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 . 
(b)  The tax levied by this article is effective on January 1, 2006, and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01-01, § 1(ch. 10, art. 3, § 11), 1-3-2006) 
Secs. 54-94—54-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6, et seq. 

Sec. 54-115. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business that recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner that issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without being limited to, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services that contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services that are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
License means a permit or certificate issued by the city that allows an entity to operate lawfully in the city. A license does not create any rights to operate in violation of any provision of this Code, and it may be revoked by the city council at any time. This definition applies to any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location that is the site of personal property that is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business. 
Practitioner of professions and occupants shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by city as an exercise of its municipal power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee does not include an administrative or registration fee.. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 54-116. - Occupation tax certificate required. 
(a)  All persons, firms, companies, or corporations, including limited liability companies and professional corporations, now or hereafter operating a business in the city, are hereby required to register their business or office, obtain an occupation tax certificate for their business or office, and pay the amount now or hereafter fixed as taxes and fees thereon. The owners of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units within the city that receive income for use of four or more such dwellings or units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 for having a location or office within the city are subject to an occupation tax as provided in this article and shall provide to the city, prior to September 1, 2006, a code compliance certificate covering 100 percent of the multifamily rental units within the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of the certification. Said code compliance certificate shall be certified by the owner that all units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. For the initial year of construction, this section shall not apply to new construction or rehabilitation of a multifamily rental dwelling provided proper permits are obtained from the city. 
(b)  The occupation tax certificate shall serve as a business license. Additional business licenses may be required as established in this chapter. 
(c)  Stock or manufacturing companies or other companies, subsidiaries, agencies, district offices, branch offices, corporations or individuals, having either their business proper or their general branch offices located within the city, and either represented by the officers of the company, or any agent, for the purpose of soliciting patronage for the same, or for the transaction of any business pertaining thereto, is required to obtain an occupation tax certificate. 
(d)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees are required to make a new application in each year. Such application is treated as an initial application and the applicant is required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 2), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2006-07-48, § 1(ch. 11, art. 12, § 2), 7-18-2006). 
State Law reference— Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 54-117. - Fee; basis. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, every business and practitioner subject to this article shall pay a tax based on the gross receipts of such business (the "occupation tax"). 
(b)  The gross receipts tax shall include a flat rate of $50.00 for the first $20,000.00 of gross revenue, and $13.00 per employee. Gross revenues above $20,000.00 are taxed using a fee class table based on profitability. The fee class table ranges from $0.50 to $2.20 per $1,000.00 of gross revenue based on the NAICS Code of the business. 
(c)  No business shall be required to pay more than $75,000.00 in occupation taxes during any calendar year commencing with the tax year of 2011. 
(d)  Effective January 1, 2011, prior to imposing the cap as set forth in subsection (c), the tax due pursuant to this Code section shall be reduced by eight percent. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 3), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2008-09-49, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 2009-09-49, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 2010-12-58, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 2010-12-59, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 54-118. - Application for registration. 
(a)  It is the duty of each person, subject to this article, to file with the tax commissioner's office on or before March 31 of each calendar year an application for registration under this article setting forth all activities of each business, its North American Industrial Classification System and/or its revenue code, its estimated gross receipts for the calendar year of the registration, computation of the amount of tax due including the administrative fee and per employee tax, a copy of the profit and loss statement, a copy of its state income tax return, and such other information as may be required by the tax commissioner's office to properly administer this article, including the information specified in section 54-120. 
(b)  For businesses or practitioners with more than one type of service or product, including businesses or practitioners listed under and subject to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), the entire gross receipts are classified according to the dominant service or product based upon the information provided under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  For each business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction, including businesses or practitioners with one or more locations or offices in the state and one or more locations outside the state, the city shall allocate the gross receipts as follows for occupation tax purposes in accordance with the following: 
(1)  a.  Where the business or practitioner can reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts of the business or practitioner to one or more of the locations or offices on the basis of product manufactured in that location or office or the sales or other services provided in that location or office, the city shall tax the gross receipts generated by the location or office within the city; or 
b.  Where the business or practitioner cannot reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts among multiple locations or offices, the business or practitioner shall divide the gross receipts reported to all local governments in this state by the number of locations or offices of the business or practitioner which contributed to the gross receipts reported to any local government in this state, and shall allocate an equal percentage of such gross receipts of the business or practitioner to each location or office. 
(2)  In no instance shall the sum of the portions of the total gross receipts of a business or practitioner taxed by all local governments exceed 100 percent of the total gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(3)  In the event of a dispute between the business or practitioner and the city as to the allocation under this section, the business or practitioner shall have the burden of proof as to the reasonableness of this allocation. 
(4)  Upon request, businesses or practitioners with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
a.  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
b.  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(d)  When the city levies an occupation tax on a business or practitioner which has locations encompassed by other jurisdictions and the other jurisdictions use different criteria for taxation, the city shall not tax any greater proportion of the gross receipts than authorized by the law. 
(e)  For each business and practitioner with no location or office within the state, but which: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the city; 
Gross receipts of such business or practitioner for purposes of this section shall include only those gross receipts reasonably attributable to sales or services in the state. If such business or practitioner provides to the tax commissioner proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state that purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state, the business or practitioner is exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 4), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2010-01-01, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 54-119. - Payment of fee; separate locations; refunds. 
(a)  Following the filing of the application as provided for in section 54-118, each business or professional practitioner subject to this Code shall remit payment in full for all taxes and fees. Each person operating under various trade names must secure a separate occupation tax certificate for each trade name issued. In addition, a separate occupation tax certificate must be secured for each business location. 
(b)  Certificate applicants for trade names and for separate business locations shall pay the nonrefundable administrative fee imposed hereby, in addition to the tax imposed by section 54-117. In the event a business ceases to operate after the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, no refund of the fee or tax is granted. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the refund of the occupation tax levied herein is governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-120. - Inspection of records; other required inspections. 
(a)  It is the duty of all businesses subject to the tax and administrative fee imposed by section 54-117, with the exception of those businesses and practitioners electing to proceed under section 54-123, to maintain and to provide as a part of their business occupation tax registration such records as will establish gross receipts as herein defined, including, but not limited to, profit and loss statements prepared on a calendar year basis, and method of allocation of revenue for businesses and practitioners maintaining locations in other counties and municipalities, if applicable. Such businesses and practitioners shall also make available for inspection by representatives of the city manager or designee all reports submitted to the sales tax unit of the Georgia department of revenue showing sales taking place in the state and other tax returns showing gross receipts. 
(b)  Lending institutions and any other organization engaged in the lending of money at interest and/or for a fee or commission and otherwise subject to the requirements of this article shall provide, for each lending transaction, a loan term sheet or other summary showing the amount of such loan, the interest rate thereon, and total fees, interest and/or commissions to be charged on such loan, assuming payment in the normal course of business. 
(c)  It is the duty of all businesses subject to the tax and administrative fee imposed by section 54-117, with the exception of those businesses and practitioners electing to proceed under section 54-123, to, after reasonable notice, make the premises of each location of the business within the city available for any and all inspections as required pursuant to any ordinance of the city. In making the premises available for inspection, the business shall allow reasonable documentation of the relevant condition or circumstances of the premises at issue by means determined appropriate by the city including but not limited to photography and/or video documentation 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 6), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2007-04-32, §§ 1, 2, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 54-121. - Termination of business. 
It is the duty of each business and practitioner subject to fees and occupation taxes under this article, when he shall cease to do business or practice, to return the current occupation tax certificate, together with a statement as to the date of termination of doing business or practice to the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 7), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-122. - Commencement of business after January 1. 
Businesses and practitioners which do not commence operation by January 1 of any year shall pay the amount of administrative fees and occupation taxes set forth in this article based on anticipated revenue for the balance of the calendar year as provided in section 54-118. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 8), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Pro-ration of fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. 
Sec. 54-123. - Professional occupation tax. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, there is hereby imposed upon practitioners of law, medicine, osteopathy, chiropractic, podiatry, dentistry, optometry, applied psychology, veterinary, landscape architecture, land surveying, massage therapy, physiotherapy, public accounting, embalming, funeral directing, civil mechanical, hydraulic and electrical engineering, architecture, marriage and family therapy, social work, and professional counseling, as their entire occupation tax, one of the following, at the practitioner's election: 
(1)  The occupation tax resulting from application of the other provisions of this article; or 
(2)  Pay a fee of $400.00 but a practitioner paying according to this shall not be required to provide information relating to the gross receipts of such practitioner. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a practitioner shall include any individual holding license to practice any of the professions specified herein regardless of whether such individual shall practice as a professional corporation of a professional association. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 9), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority for professional occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Sec. 54-124. - Transfer, suspension, and revocation. 
(a)  New location. 
(1)  Any business or practitioner subject to this article moving from one location to another location within the city limits shall notify the city of such move and of the new address in writing, on a form provided by the city, no later than 30 days prior to the date that the business or practitioner moves to the new location. 
(2)  A new certificate will be issued upon payment of a change of location fee if the new location conforms to the building and zoning regulations of the city. The amount of the change of location fee is established as part of the schedule of fees as approved by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  New owner. No certificate issued hereunder may be transferred to any other person, partnership, corporation, business, practitioner or other entity. Any new business owner or practitioner shall apply and register for a new certificate within 30 days after the commencement of business. 
(c)  Notice. 
(1)  Whenever, in the opinion of the city, there is cause to suspend or revoke this certificate, a written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the certificate shall be sent by certified mail to the certificate holder. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the certificate holder may present his case before the city council or its designee. The hearing shall take place not more than 30 days after the issuance of the notice. 
(2)  After the hearing, the city council or its designee may suspend or revoke this certificate if the grounds set forth in subsection (c)(3) of this section exist or if the city council or its designee determines the establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare. The findings and decision of the city council or its designee shall be forwarded in writing to the city's tax collector within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city's tax collector to notify the certificate holder by certified mail of the action taken with a copy of the findings and decision within ten days of receipt by the city's tax collector. 
(3)  The decision to suspend or revoke a certificate issued under this section is solely within the discretion of the city council or such board as the city council may designate. An occupation tax certificate may be suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds, but is not limited to: 
a.  The certificate holder is guilty of fraud in the business or occupation he practices, or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
b.  The certificate holder is engaged in his business or occupation under a false or unauthorized assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
c.  The certificate holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his duties; 
d.  The certificate holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
e.  The certificate holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq.), or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If, after having been granted a certificate, the applicant is found not to be rehabilitated, or pleads guilty or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses in this section, said certificate is subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
f.  The application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
g.  The certificate holder refuses to allow inspection and documentation of the premises of any business location as required in this article. Said refusal is grounds only for suspension or revocation as provided in this section, unless expressly provided otherwise by any other ordinance applicable to the business; or 
h.  Any ordinance or law having a reasonable relationship to the ability of the licensee to carrying on the licensed business or occupation. 
(4)  The decision of the city council or its designee shall be final unless the certificate holder applies to the Superior Court of Fulton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 10), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2007-04-32, § 3, 4-17-2007; Ord. No. 2007-06-36, 6-5-2007; Ord. No. 2009-09-46, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 54-125. - Payment; penalty; issuance of executions against delinquent taxpayers. 
(a)  Any occupation tax with its associated administrative fees hereunder is due and payable by March 31 of each calendar year. If the business or practice was not in operation on January 1, the occupation tax with its associated administrative fees are due and payable 30 days following the commencement of business pursuant to section 54-122. The city shall assess a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the amount owed for each calendar year or portion thereof for: 
(1)  Failure to file an application by March 31 of any calendar year, when the business or practitioner was in operation the preceding calendar year; and/or 
(2)  Failure to pay occupation taxes and administrative fees when due within 90 days of the due date. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes and fees are subject to interest at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. Payments required by the article herein may be collected in any suit at law or in equity, or the city may cause executions to issue against the person liable for the payment. Executions are levied and sold together with all costs thereof, by the city, or city's designee, as ex officio sheriff of the county. In addition, any person whose duty it is to register any business or practice and obtain any occupation tax certificate and fails to do so, or who fails to pay the occupation tax or administrative fee required by this article, or who makes any deliberate or substantial and material false statement on an application or provides materially false information in support of an application, is denied an occupation tax certificate, is required to surrender any existing such occupation tax certificate and shall be deemed to have no such occupation tax certificate for purposes hereof, and is subject to a civil fine according to the maximum amount allowable under state law. 
(c)  No business and/or practitioner subject to this article shall collect any gross receipts as defined herein unless such business and/or practitioner shall have applied for a business tax certificate and/or license as required hereunder. Upon application for a business tax certificate, any such business and/or practitioner may thereupon collect gross receipts, including those incurred but not collected during the period prior to the application, but such business and/or practitioner is subject to the penalties of subsection (a) of this section. If the taxes and fees remain unpaid after the due date, the business and/or practitioner shall not collect any gross receipts as defined herein. 
(d)  Practitioners of law may collect gross receipts as defined herein without applying for and obtaining a business tax certificate. However, practitioners of law must pay the occupation tax levied herein. Delinquent taxes and fees are subject to interest at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. Any occupation tax with its associated administrative fees hereunder is due and payable by March 31 of each calendar year. If the business or practice was not in operation on January l, the occupation tax with its associated administrative fees are due and payable 30 days following the commencement of business pursuant to section 54-122. The city shall assess a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the amount owed for each calendar year, or portion thereof, for failure to pay the occupation tax required by the article herein may be collected in any suit at law or in equity, or the city may cause executions to issue against the person liable for the payment. Executions are levied and sold together with all costs thereof, by the city or its designee, as ex officio sheriff of the county. In addition, failure to pay the occupation tax required by this article shall subject the person, firm, or corporation to a civil fine of $500.00 as provided by law of this state. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 11), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Time for payment of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty for late payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; issuance of executions against delinquent taxpayers, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. 
Sec. 54-126. - Proration of fee. 
When any person or business commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax authorized hereby is levied at the customary rate on the gross receipts of the business or practitioner form the commencement of the business, but the attendant administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 1, § 13), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Proration of fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. 
Sec. 54-127. - Hearings. 
(a)  The city council or its designee shall hear deferred applications or appeals from administrative decisions by the business and occupation tax office with regard to applications for licenses, transfers, renewals, change of ownership or other matters affecting such licenses. 
(b)  Such appeals to the city council or its designee shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final decision or action of the city's tax collector. The hearing before the city council or its designee shall take place not more than 30 days after the filing of the appeal. 
(c)  The findings and decision of the city council or its designee shall be forwarded to the city's tax collector within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city's tax collector to notify the certificate holder or applicant by certified mail of the action taken with a copy of the findings and decision within ten days after receipt by the city's tax collector. 
(d)  If any individual, firm, or corporation subject to the payment of an occupation tax deems the tax amount to be unlawful, discriminatory, or improper, it may file a written request for review by the city's tax collector or his designee. The request for review must be filed within 15 days from the date of the disputed tax notice. The tax collector or his designee shall, within 30 days from the date of receipt of the request for review, schedule a conference with the occupation tax certificate holder to review those matters set forth in the request for review. Within 30 days from the date of the conference or date of production or provision of additional information, whichever is later, a determination shall be made by the city's tax collector or his designee in writing and a copy of the determination shall be sent to the certificate holder. In the event the certificate holder is dissatisfied with the determination made by the city's tax collector or his designee, it may, within 15 days from the date of the tax collector's or his designee's determination and conditioned upon payment of the full disputed amount of tax, interest, and penalty by the certificate holder to the tax collector, file its appeal with the city clerk for review of the decision by the city council or its designee in the manner outlined above in subsection (b). 
(e)  The decision and findings of the city council or its designee shall be final unless the certificate holder applies to the Superior Court of Fulton County by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09-47, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 2010-08-36, 8-17-2010) 
Secs. 54-128—54-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSURANCE COMPANIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to impose license fees on insurers, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 

Sec. 54-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
Insurer means a company that is authorized to transact business in any classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 2, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-152. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city, in the amount of $150.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 54-153, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $150.00. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 2, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-153. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
There is hereby levied an additional annual license fee in the maximum amount permitted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2) for each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee in the maximum amount permitted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(2) on each insurance company. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 2, § 4), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2006-02-17, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 54-154. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 54-152. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 2, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-155. - Gross premiums tax imposed on all other insurers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premium received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(b)  The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 54-152. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 2, § 6), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-156. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed by sections 54-152 and 54-153 are due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 2, § 7), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2006-01-02, ch. 11, art. 2, § 7, 1-3-2006) 
Secs. 54-157—54-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-90 et seq. 

Sec. 54-181. - Definitions. 
The definitions in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-6-90 and 48-6-93 apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 4, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-182. - Tax levied; rate. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 4, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-183. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a) is $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 4, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-184. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article are paid to the city manager or designee at the time of filing the return. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 4, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 54-185. - Relation of tax to other business licenses. 
The tax imposed by this article is in lieu of any other business license upon depository financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-02, § 1(ch. 11, art. 4, § 7), 12-1-2005) 
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate motor vehicles, § 1.03(b)(16). 
State Law reference— Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Adoption of state and federal laws; penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Adoption of federal law by reference. For the purpose of regulating vehicles and traffic in the city, there is hereby adopted, as if fully set out herein, the following federal regulations: 
(1)  Reference 49 CFR 382, 383, 390—393, and 395—397, the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986; and 
(2)  The Federal "Out of Service" Criteria as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Adoption of state law by reference. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. title 49, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road," and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(c)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by law, every person convicted of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 1, § 1), 12-1-2005) 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate motor vehicles and traffic, § 1.03(b)(16). 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt state traffic laws by reference, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 58-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters, and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable for that violation as for other violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 1, § 2), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 58-3. - Funeral processions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Funeral procession means a group of vehicles traveling from a funeral home or similar business to a cemetery or other proper burial site. Funeral processions shall be lead by a funeral vehicle such as a hearse, and all cars in the procession shall burn regular headlights and stay in close formation. 
(b)  Vehicles given the right-of-way; exception. Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided such vehicles shall identify themselves by burning regular headlights and shall keep in close formation. When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though such signal may change to red. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 1, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76. 
Sec. 58-4. - Speed limits on city roadways. 
(a)  Speed limits enumerated. The maximum speed limits on the public streets or parts of the public streets are set forth in Exhibit A, identified as "List of Roadways for City of Sandy Springs," and by this reference incorporated herein. Exhibit A contains two parts consisting of "on-system" and "off-system" designations. As used in Exhibit A, "on-system" shall mean the designation of roadways in the city for which authorization has been obtained to utilize radar detection systems. As used in Exhibit A, "off-system" shall mean the designation of roadways in the city for which there is no authorization to utilize radar detection systems. Exhibit A establishes speed limits for all roadways currently within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Speed detection devices. All law enforcement personnel of the city who are certified in the use of speed detection devices are authorized to use such devices, in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations, in the locations designated as "on-system" on Exhibit A, as approved by the state department of transportation and the state department of public safety. 
(c)  Amendment to Exhibit A. The city may add to or amend the list of roadways designated in Exhibit A from time to time pursuant to the statutes and regulations governing the establishment or alteration of speed limits and zones in the state. The city may add to or amend the list of roadways designated as "on-system" and "off-system" in Exhibit A from time to time pursuant to the statutes and regulations governing applications for permits to use speed detection devices in the state. 
(d)  Exhibit A incorporated by reference. Exhibit A referenced in this section, as amended from time to time, is incorporated herein by reference as if set out in its entirety and the original shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and available for inspection by the public during city business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 1, § 4), 12-1-2005; Ord. No. 2006-04-19, § 1, 4-4-2006; Ord. No. 2007-07-42, 7-17-2007) 
State Law reference— Authority for local regulation of speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-9. 
Sec. 58-5. - Skateboards and bicycles. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle or propel rollerskates, skateboards, or other similar devices upon a public street, highway, or sidewalk in a manner which would constitute an unreasonable danger to the public or which would disrupt the public's ordinary and customary use of such street, highway or sidewalk. 
(b)  No person shall ride a bicycle or propel rollerskates, skateboards, or other similar devices on sidewalks which are properly designated for pedestrians only. The chief of police and the department of public works, after approval of the city manager, are authorized to erect or have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles or propelling of rollerskates, skateboards, or other similar devices. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the signs. 
(c)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skating upon a sidewalk, that person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a violation of this Code; provided, however, that any offender under the age of 17 years shall be treated as provided by O.C.G.A. title 15, ch. 11 (O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq.). The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit that child or ward to violate any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02-10, § 1(ch. 16, art. 2, § 2), 2-7-2006) 
State Law reference— Bicycles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq. 
Sec. 58-6. - Private residential property trespass and private residential property trespass towing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park means to park unattended or abandon a vehicle on private residential property without authority or permission of the owner or occupant of the private residential property. 
Private residential property means residential property within the city which is privately owned and which contains not more than four residential units thereon. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Wrecker or wrecker service shall initially mean A-Tow Roswell, Inc., 11512 North Fulton Industrial Boulevard, Alpharetta, Georgia 30004. "Wrecker or wrecker service" shall subsequently mean an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing vehicles which meets the qualifications imposed by the state public service commission and the city for nonconsensual towing pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13, as may be amended from time to time, and chapter 11 of the transportation rules of the state public service commission, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Prohibited on private residential property without invitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon private residential property in the city without invitation or permission from the owner or person in legal possession of the premises. Any person or his or her authorized agent entitled to the possession of any parcel or space of private residential property shall have the right to remove or cause to be removed from the private residential property any vehicle thereon which is not authorized to be at the place where it is found and to store or cause to be stored such vehicle. 
(c)  Removal and storage. Upon notification by a person entitled to the possession of private residential property that a vehicle is trespassing thereon, the city police department shall provide such person with the name and telephone number of the city's authorized wrecker service for nonconsensual towing, as determined by resolution of the council of the city. The city police department shall not contact the wrecker service directly for the removal of the trespassing vehicle from the private residential property, but shall assist the person owning the private residential property by providing the name and telephone number of the city's authorized wrecker service for nonconsensual towing. 
(d)  State law adopted. The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13 are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09-55, § 4(ch. 13, art. 4, §§ 1—3), 9-18-2007) 
Sec. 58-7. - Nonconsensual towing carriers; public electronic notification system; other purposes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
Nonconsensual towing means without the prior consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle being towed. 
Nonconsensual towing carrier means a wrecker service engaged in the towing of trespassing vehicles on private property without prior consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the vehicle and having a secure impoundment facility. 
Normal business hours means operating hours of a nonconsensual towing carrier as approved by the commission. 
Secure impoundment facility means a facility owned or leased by a towing company for the purpose of providing secure storage of towed vehicles. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing vehicles. 
(b)  Compliance required. The requirements of this section shall be in addition to any and all requirements of the commission in its authority to regulate and control the towing of trespassing vehicles on private property as provided in O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. It shall be unlawful for any nonconsensual towing carrier to use or operate upon any of the streets of the city without complying with this section. 
(c)  Lettering on wreckers. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any street of the city any wrecker unless the vehicle shall have lettered on each side in plain view the name of the person owning and causing the wrecker to operate on the streets of the city, the address from which the wrecker is operating and the telephone number. This lettering shall be in a contrasting color to the color of the wrecker and shall be at least two and one-half inches in height, and shall be permanently affixed to the wrecker. Magnetic signs are prohibited. 
(d)  Notification upon removal of vehicle at request of other than police officer. 
(1)  The operator of any wrecker removing a vehicle at the request of any person other than a police officer on duty for the police department shall report by electronic means to the police department the fact that the vehicle was removed, released and its present storage place, together with a description of the vehicle, vehicle identification number and the tag number. The electronic report shall be made by the wrecker driver by electronic communication within one hour of the deposit of the vehicle at its storage point and within 24 hours of its release to the vehicle owner or agent of the vehicle owner. 
(2)  The police department shall be authorized to engage the services of a person or entity authorized by the state to provide notice to owners of towed or impounded vehicles. 
(e)  Impound lot; attendant. 
(1)  Upon impoundment of any vehicle by a wrecker service, the wrecker service shall maintain all records required by the commission, including the following information: 
a.  Date and time the call was received by the wrecker service; 
b.  Name of the caller; 
c.  Date and time of initial towing; 
d.  Place of initial towing; 
e.  Date and time of arrival at the impound lot; 
f.  Date and time of release to the owner of the impounded vehicle; and 
g.  Name of the wrecker driver and helper. 
(2)  The records required in subsection (1) above shall be maintained at a location where affected members of the public may obtain such information electronically, by telephone or in person, during normal business hours. Further, all wrecker services, public and private, which impound vehicles pursuant to this section shall register with the police department the current telephone number of the person responsible for releasing the vehicles. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service to operate in the city without employing the services of a check approval agency and the major credit card services; and it shall be unlawful to refuse to accept, in lieu of cash, any check which can be insured by a check approval agency, any draft drawn on a credit union which can be insured by a check approval agency or any major credit card for the payment of any and all fees and costs resulting from the towing and storage of the impounded vehicle. For purposes of this subsection, the term "major credit card" means a Visa, MasterCard, American Express and Discovery card. 
(f)  Penalties for violation of this section. A violation of any provision of this section shall result in the following penalties: 
First offense: $250.00 
Second and subsequent offenses: $500.00 
(Ord. No. 2009-02-05, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 58-8. - Direction of traffic. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an individual, business, private contractor or other entity to utilize the services of an off-duty public safety officer to direct traffic in a public right-of-way within the city for its clients, employees or events without having obtained a permit from the city to do so as hereinafter provided. "Direction of traffic", as used in this section, shall mean the controlling or restricting of movement of any motor vehicle that is traveling in a public right-of-way within the city. 
(b)  A public safety officer utilized by an individual, business, private contractor or other entity to direct traffic shall be approved by the city police department as qualified to do so and shall be subject to all applicable rules, regulations and guidelines of the city's police department. 
(c)  Every individual, business, private contractor or other entity desiring to obtain a permit required by this section shall make written application to the city's revenue department in the form approved by the department. The application shall provide all information as may be requested by the city. Failure to furnish any information requested by the city in consideration of the application within 30 days of request by the city shall result in automatic dismissal of the application. 
(d)  Any application for a permit submitted to the revenue department pursuant to this section shall be subject to the approval of the city's public works department, with the concurrence of the city's police department. Approval of a permit under this section, when given, is subject to modification or cancellation by the city at any time by providing seven days' written notice of modification or cancellation to the holder of the permit. 
(e)  A permit issued under this section shall be renewable on an annual basis. At all times, an individual, business, private contractor or other entity having obtained a permit pursuant to this section must have on display, in a conspicuous location within the offices of the individual, business, private contractor or other entity as designated in the permit application, the permit for the current permitting year, to be available for inspection by authorized representatives of the city at all times. 
(f)  Any individual, business, private contractor or other entity who violates this provision is guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12-60, 12-16-2008) 
Secs. 58-9—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRUCK ROUTES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicle size and load limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-20 et seq.; enforcement of load limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27. 

Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bimodal semitrailer means a detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling on the rear of a truck by which it is partially supported during movement over the highway and designed either with retractable flanged wheels or to attach to a detachable flanged wheel assembly for movement on the rails. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof, any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area, and residential or farm properties, timberland or forest. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 3), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— Definitions, motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
Sec. 58-32. - Restrictive vehicles required to use truck routes; exceptions. 
All trucks are prohibited from using roadways within the city limits, except those roadways authorized by this article as truck routes, including any amendments hereof, or as may be further designated by the governing authority as truck routes, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  If the terminal, parking lot, repair garage, or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from those places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route. 
(2)  If a delivery or pickup is to be made at a location which is not on a designated truck route; ingress to and egress from that location shall be made by the most direct route available between that location and the nearest designated truck route. 
(3)  If a delivery or pickup is to be made by a truck, road tractor, combination road tractor-trailer within any area that is not on a designated truck route; such delivery or pickup shall not be made between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 4), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 58-33. - Posted regulatory signs. 
A list and map of approved truck routes are kept on file with the city police department and the city clerk. The list of truck routes may be revised as deemed necessary by the city police department with the approval of the city council, with the entire list requiring renewal by the city council biannually. All listed routes will be further identified by posted regulatory signs. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 5), 12-1-2005) 
State Law reference— No violation of ordinance unless regulatory sign is posted on roadway, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(c). 
Sec. 58-34. - Use of temporary truck routes by restricted vehicles. 
If a designated truck route, or any portion thereof, is under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the city council and further identified by the posting of the regulatory traffic control sign. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 6), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 58-35. - Evidence required for restricted vehicle to be off truck route. 
When upon roadways other than those designated as truck routes, any person driving or in charge or control of any of the motor vehicles restricted by this article is prepared to present for inspection of police officers his log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a roadway other than a designated truck route. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 7), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 58-36. - Weight of vehicle and loads. 
No vehicle shall be operated on any roadway within the city limits designated as a truck route, with a total gross weight in excess of 56,000 pounds unless the vehicle is making a pickup or delivery on such road. The maximum gross weight of any vehicle operating on any roadway within the city limits shall not exceed 80,000 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 8), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 58-37. - Weight limitations on streets, bridges and culverts. 
(a)  It is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any street within the city limits, where the weight of such motor vehicle, with or without load, is in excess of the weight as limited by this article and where signs indicating such limitations are posted. Further, it is unlawful to drive any motor vehicle over a bridge or culvert within the city limits, over the weight capacity shown on said bridge and/or culvert. 
(b)  The driver and/or owner is liable to the city for any and all damages caused by driving an overweight motor vehicle over any street, bridge and/or culvert with a posted sign. These damages are in addition to any fine or punishment that may be assessed for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 9), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 58-38. - Enforcement of weight and load limitations. 
(a)  Any person who violates the load limitation provisions of this article is conclusively presumed to have damaged the public roads, including bridges within the city limits by reason of such overloading and shall, in addition to any other penalty at law, recompensed the city for such damages in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27, as same may be amended. 
(b)  Any owner or operator of a vehicle which is operated on the public roads within the city limits, in violation of the weight limits provided in this article, is required, in addition to paying the monies provided in subsection (a) of this section, to unload all gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds over the legal weight limit before being allowed to move the vehicle. 
(c)  Any person authorized by state law and this article to enforce this article may seize the offending vehicle of an owner who fails or whose operator has failed to pay the monies proscribed in O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27(a) and hold such vehicle until the proscribed moneys are paid. Any authorized person seizing such vehicle under this subsection or subsection (b) of this section may, when necessary, store the vehicle, and the owner thereof is responsible for all reasonable storage charges thereon. When any vehicle is seized, held, unloaded or partially unloaded under this section, the load or any part thereof is removed or cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle without any liability on the part of the authorized person or the city because of damage to or loss of such load or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 10), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 58-39. - Parking of commercial vehicles, trucks, trailers and buses. 
(a)  It is unlawful to park any commercial vehicle or any trailer, whether commercial or private, on the right-of-way of any residential street, unless said commercial vehicle is making a delivery to residential property. This section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers, or equipment temporarily located within a construction area, provided such vehicles, trailers or equipment are used in connection with dwelling units or utilities under construction or repair within such construction area. Any parking allowed within the right-of-way pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all other rules, regulations and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand any bus, truck, or other freight-carrying vehicle in excess of 12,500 pounds (gross vehicle weight) upon the right-of-way of any nonresidential public street or highway for a period longer than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(c)  No person shall stop or stand any vehicle with a body more than eight feet wide or ten feet high on any street or public place, except where permitted for loading or unloading as designated, without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09-48, § 1, 9-1-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-09-48, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 2009, amended § 58-39 in its entirety. The former § 58-39 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 11), 12-1-2005. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate parking, O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-2(3), 40-6-200 et seq., 40-6-371. 
Sec. 58-40. - Parking or storage of unlicensed, inoperable vehicles, trailers or equipment. 
Vehicles and trailers of any kind without current license plates, or vehicles, trailers or equipment permitted to remain in an inoperable condition for more than 30 days shall not be parked or stored on or about any property within a residential zoned district. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or equipment stored in an enclosed structure or appropriately covered and located in the rear yard area. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 12), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 58-41. - Penalty of article. 
Any person who violates this article is guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 2005-12-10, § 1(ch. 13, art. 2, § 13), 12-1-2005) 
Secs. 58-42—58-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 58-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial motor vehicle means any self-propelled or towed vehicle, or combination of such, designed or used to transport passengers or property and satisfies all or one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating of 10,001 or more pounds; 
(2)  Is designed or used to transport more than eight passengers, including the driver, for compensation; 
(3)  Is designed or used to transport more than 15 passengers, including the driver, and is not for compensation; or 
(4)  Is used in transporting hazardous material in a quantity requiring placards in accordance with the motor carrier safety rules prescribed by the United States Department of Transportation, 49 CFR 172.500—172.560. 
Recreational vehicle means any self-propelled or towed vehicle, or combination of such, used for leisure time activities or as a dwelling unit while traveling. Examples include a camper, a motor home and a travel trailer. 
Trailer means any nonautomotive vehicle designed to be towed for the purpose of transporting or carrying objects or persons. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04-21, § 4(ch. 13, art. 3, § 1), 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-72. - Parking or abandonment prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to park or abandon a commercial motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, or trailer upon the streets or upon the rights-of-way of the streets and allow said commercial motor vehicle to remain parked or abandoned for more than 72 consecutive hours. 
Ord. No. 2006-04-21, § 4(ch. 13, art. 3, § 2), 4-18-2006) 
State Law reference— Local authority for removal of discarded vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
Sec. 58-73. - Removal and storage. 
Should any sworn police officer find any motor vehicle that has been parked or abandoned as aforesaid, he shall have the right to impound the vehicle and to have same removed from the streets at the expense of the owner, and charge the owners storage. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04-21, § 4(ch. 13, art. 3, § 3), 4-18-2006) 
State Law reference— Authority for all peace officers to remove abandoned vehicles from public property, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-3. 
Secs. 58-74—58-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICE 

Sec. 58-86. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator or vehicle immobilization service to operate within the municipal limits of the City of Sandy Springs without complying with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-87. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Impound shall mean any means to prohibit a motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device. 
Vehicle immobilization service shall mean a person or entity that does not operate parking facilities as a primary purpose and uses vehicle immobilization devices as a method of parking control for others, including, but not limited to, educational institutions, houses of worship, restaurants, shopping centers and freestanding establishments with adjacent parking for patrons, customers, or invitees. 
Operator shall mean any person or entity operating vehicle immobilization devices for a vehicle immobilization service. 
Vehicle immobilization device, device or boot shall mean any mechanical device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-88. - License to operate a vehicle immobilization service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service to operate within the territorial limits of the city without having obtained a license granted by the chief of police, or his or her designee, as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service to be licensed hereunder if that vehicle immobilization service is also engaged in the business of parking lot ownership or operations or valet parking operations within the municipal limits of the City of Sandy Springs. 
(c)  Every vehicle immobilization service desiring to obtain a license required by this article shall file an application with the City of Sandy Springs police department on forms to be prepared and approved by the police department. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant; where the proposed business is to be located; nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the charges to be imposed for various services; amounts and types of insurance held; such other information as may be required by the chief of police; and shall be sworn by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-89. - Permit to operate as an operator of a vehicle immobilization service. 
(a)  Every operator desiring to obtain a permit required by this article shall file an application with the city's police department on forms to be prepared and approved by the police department. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, and telephone number; driver's license number or state issued identification number; and such other information as may be required by the chief of police and shall be sworn by the applicant. 
(b)  Once issued, operators shall carry with them their permit at all times when they are in the process of installing a vehicle immobilization device. 
(c)  A permit will be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit or renewal shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting, and such other investigation as may be required by the police department. The fee for a permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator without first having been fingerprinted by the Sandy Springs police department and having been issued a permit by the city's policy department indicating that such person is eligible to be an operator of a vehicle immobilization service or device. Any person denied a license under this section shall have the right of appeal to the mayor and city council. 
(d)  No person shall impound a vehicle by the use of a vehicle immobilization device unless he/she has obtained a permit to operate as an operator of a vehicle immobilization service. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to install vehicle immobilization devices on vehicles if such operator is engaged in the business of parking lot ownership or operations or valet parking operations within the municipal limits of the City of Sandy Springs. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 2013-05-06, § 1, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 58-90. - General requirements for applicants of a license or permit. 
(a)  All applicants, whether a vehicle immobilization service or an operator, shall furnish all data, information and records relevant to the application requested of them by the city's police department. Failure to furnish this data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall automatically result in dismissal, with prejudice, of the application. Persons under an applicant's control are the partners of the applicant if the applicant is a partnership, the officers of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, and/or employees, officers or agents of the applicant. 
(b)  When a person applies for an operator's permit, the chief of police or his designee shall have a complete and extensive search made to determine if there is a police record of such person. If there is a record of conduct prohibited by this chapter, issuance of an operator's permit shall be denied. 
(c)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued an operator's permit if the chief of police receives information which warrants such a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that warrants revocation of the operator's permit, the operator's permit may be revoked. 
(d)  Should any of the information provided by an individual on the original application, or any renewal, change during the one-year term of an issued operator's permit, the individual shall promptly notify the city police department of the change and provide the new information. The city police department shall then issue, at no charge to the individual, a new operator's permit for the remainder of the one-year term. The chief of police or his designee is authorized to conduct a concurrent criminal history check at no charge to the individual. 
(e)  No license or permit under this article shall be issued to any person who has been convicted in this state or any other state within three years immediately prior to the application for a license or permit of a crime involving distribution or possession of illegal narcotics, sex offenses, or any other crime involving moral turpitude. Further, to be eligible for an operator's permit under this article, the person applying must possess a current Georgia driver's license. Any person denied a license or a permit under this section or any person whose license or permit may be revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal this denial or revocation to the mayor and city council. 
(f)  Should any person with a license or a permit obtained pursuant to this article be charged with committing any crime as described in subsection (e) above, then such charge shall constitute the basis for adverse action, including suspension or revocation of the license or permit. 
(g)  A license or permit issued through administrative error may be revoked by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-91. - Registration of vehicles used by a vehicle immobilization service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or to operate within the city any vehicle assisting in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service without first having filed a registration for such vehicle with the city's police department on forms to be furnished by the police department. All registrations for each vehicle utilized shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall be renewed between December 1 and December 31 of each year. The information for registration shall contain the following: 
(a)  The make, model and manufacturer's serial number of the vehicle; 
(b)  The date the vehicle was put into service to assist in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service; 
(c)  The driver's license number of any operator of the vehicle; 
(d)  The name of the insurance company with which the owner of the vehicle and all operators have liability insurance coverage with respect to the operation of the vehicle, as required by law; 
(e)  The operator permit number of each operator who shall drive or operate the vehicle on behalf of the vehicle immobilization service; and 
(f)  Such other information related to the vehicle as may be required by the Sandy Springs police department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-92. - Application, license and permit fees. 
(a)  A nonrefundable application fee for all applicants seeking a vehicle immobilization service license shall be submitted with the completed application, made payable to the Sandy Springs police department. The application fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  An annual license fee shall be paid if an application for a vehicle immobilization service license is approved. The annual license fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application fee for all applicants seeking an operator's permit shall be paid upon the filing of a completed application. The application fee shall be made payable to the city's police department. The amount of the application fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. An additional fee shall be charged to cover the cost for the background check required by section 58-89(c) in an amount set by resolution of the city council, which shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(d)  An annual permit fee shall be paid if an operator's permit is approved. The amount of the annual permit fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. An additional fee shall be charged to cover the cost for the background check required by section 58-89(c) in an amount set by resolution of the city council, which shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(e)  The annual fees set forth in this section shall be prorated starting with the date the license or permit is issued to December 31 of the first year of operation as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-93. - General requirements for vehicle immobilization services and operators. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to procure a license or a permit by fraudulent conduct or a false statement of a material fact. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to pay in the form of a gratuity any person who does not own or operate a commercial parking lot for information as to illegally parked vehicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to make any payment to an owner, employee, agent or a person in possession of a commercial parking lot in excess of the reasonable and customary fee ordinarily charged by the owner or person in possession of the parking lot for parking thereon, and any such excess payment shall be considered a kickback. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to charge fees in excess of those set forth in this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to immobilize any vehicle located on any portion of a public street within the city, unless properly authorized in writing by the chief of police of the city. 
(f)  A vehicle immobilization service must maintain a 24-hour per day, 365 days per year phone number that is staffed by a live operator to communicate immediately with a driver of a vehicle that has been immobilized by the vehicle immobilization service. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to immobilize vehicles at any off-street parking facility, vacant lot, or other private property without having a valid written contract specifically for such services entered into with the private property owner or lawful lessee thereof. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or operator to fail to arrive on the site where the vehicle was immobilized within one hour of being contacted by the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle. It shall also be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to fail to release vehicles from immobilization within 30 minutes after receipt of payment from the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle that has been immobilized by a vehicle immobilization device. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or operator to fail to provide a receipt of payment of the booting fee to the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle. The receipt shall have the following information: the name, address, and phone number of the vehicle immobilization service or company and the name and signature or the person who applied/removed the boot or vehicle immobilization device. 
(j)  In the event that the application of a vehicle immobilization device damages a vehicle, then the vehicle immobilization service must pay the cost of repairs for that damage. 
(k)  In the event that the owner or operator of a vehicle, to which an immobilization device has been applied, attempts to operate said vehicle or remove the device, then the vehicle immobilization service is not liable for any damage to that vehicle. Additionally, the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle will be liable to the vehicle immobilization service for the cost of damage to the vehicle immobilization device. 
(l)  A vehicle immobilization service must procure reasonable insurance, as determined by the city's police department, to cover damage caused to vehicles by the use of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(m)  A vehicle immobilization service shall keep copies of permits issued to its operators under this article in its place of business so that such permits may be inspected by any member of the Sandy Springs police department at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-94. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city's police department or the chief's designee may recommend the revocation, suspension, the imposition of a fine, or nonrenewal of a license of a vehicle immobilization service or a permit of an operator for due cause. As used in this section, the term "due cause" includes unlawful conduct under any section of this article by a vehicle immobilization service or an operator. 
(b)  No adverse action shall be taken regarding any license or permit pursuant to this article until and after notice has been provided and a hearing has been held before the mayor and city council to determine just cause for such action. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such license or permit and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(c)  The notice shall be served upon the license or permit holder by delivering the notice personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license or permit holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license or permit holder cannot be found and the service of notice cannot otherwise be made in the manner provided in this section, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage, fully prepaid, addressed to the license or permit holder at the license or permit holder's place of business or residence, at least 13 days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(d)  The mayor and city council shall conduct the hearings and report its conclusions and recommendations to the chief of police. The chief of police, upon receiving the report, shall, within 60 days, deny applications for new licenses and shall revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any affected license. In lieu of suspension, revocation or the failure to renew, the mayor and city council may impose a fine upon any vehicle immobilization service or operator, such fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation of this article. The decision of the mayor and city council may be appealed to the Fulton County superior court by filing a writ of certiorari. 
(e)  Any vehicle immobilization service whose license has been revoked or an operator whose permit has been revoked pursuant to this Code section shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license or permit for 12 months immediately following the revocation. The violation of any provision of this article by any person with any ownership interest in a vehicle immobilization service may result in the revocation of the vehicle immobilization service's license. 
(f)  The actions of an operator working within the scope of his employment for a vehicle immobilization service can be attributed to the vehicle immobilization service for purposes of determining due cause under this section. 
(g)  A violation of this article shall be a violation of the Code, as set forth in section 1-10 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-95. - Fees charged by vehicle immobilization service. 
(a)  Any vehicle immobilization service engaged in the business of the immobilization of vehicles shall not charge the owner of any immobilized vehicle or personal property a fee in excess of an amount approved by resolution of city council, per day, for the removal of the vehicle immobilization device or devices or the release from impoundment, which amounts shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by city council. Such amounts shall be all-inclusive, and no additional fees may be charged for using other equipment in connection with the removal of the vehicle immobilization device or devices or the release from impoundment. 
(b)  Fees may be paid by cash, check, credit card, or debit card at no additional charge. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-96. - Signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person hired by an owner of any private property, or his agent or employee, located within the territorial limits of the city to install or attach to any vehicle a vehicle immobilization device(s), boot(s), or other instrument(s) that is/are designed to, or have the effect of, restricting the normal movement of such vehicle or by any other means whatsoever to restrict the normal movement of such vehicle, unless the owner of the property, or his agent or employee, has complied with all applicable city zoning ordinances regarding the posting of signs and the following requirements: 
(a)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance to a parking lot or parking area where parking prohibitions are to be effective. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be erected so as to be clearly visible from each and every parking space. 
(b)  Such signs shall be a minimum of 18 inches high by 12 inches wide. 
(c)  The bottom of such signs located at a designated entrance to a parking lot shall be at least four feet above the site grade. Where there is no designated entrance, the bottom of such signs shall be six feet above site grade. 
(d)  Such signs shall include the following language: 
(1)  WARNING 
(2)  Unauthorized vehicles may be impounded (booted) at owner's risk and expense 
(3)  Cost of Impound: $75-$450 
(4)  Boot Removal: Tel: [insert company's correct telephone number] 
(5)  Complaints may be made to the Sandy Springs Police Department: 
Tel: 770-551-6900 
(6)  This lot is owned or operated by [insert company name and telephone number] 
(e)  Such signs shall use the typeface/font: Impact. Layout design, including point size for type, shall be substantially identical to example signs which are on file with the city clerk or public works director. Sizing specifications are also included for signage measuring 18 inches high by 24 inches wide should a larger sign be desired. 
(f)  Misleading signs are prohibited. 
No abbreviations shall be used in the language contained in the sign. Where this section leaves a blank, the signs shall include the appropriate information. The lettering on such signs shall be black on a white, reflective background, and shall be illuminated if out of headlight range. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012; Ord. No. 2013-05-06, § 2, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 58-97. - Lettering on vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to operate within the territorial limits of the city any vehicle to assist in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service unless the vehicle shall have displayed on each side in plain view the name of the vehicle immobilization service, the address from which the vehicle immobilization service is operating and the telephone number of the vehicle immobilization service. The lettering shall be in a contrasting color to the color of the vehicle and shall be at least two and one-half inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-98. - Service calls. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service or operator to go to any place and immobilize a vehicle unless: 
(a)  Called by the owner, owner's agent, representative or employee of a commercial parking lot; or 
(b)  Where a vehicle immobilization service has a contract to immobilize illegally parked cars at a specific commercial parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-99. - Vehicle not immobilized upon operator of vehicle returning. 
The operator of any vehicle immobilization services shall not immobilize a vehicle and shall not charge a fee if the driver of the vehicle returns before the installation of the vehicle immobilization device is complete. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-100. - License not in lieu of occupation tax certificate. 
The license issued under this article shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license or tax occupation certificate issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 58-101. - Effective date of enforcement of article. 
This article shall become effective upon adoption by the city council and approval by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11-34, 11-6-2012) 
Secs. 58-102—58-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING AT CITY SPRINGS 

Sec. 58-120. - City Springs defined. 
City Springs as used in this article shall be defined by the same boundaries as section 6-175 of the Sandy Springs Code of Ordinances and shall include without limitation all surface and subsurface areas used for the parking of any vehicle. City Springs is an area where parking is occupied by patrons of businesses, government offices and public spaces with high need for turnover parking. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05-14 , § II, 5-15-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-21 , § I, 7-17-2018; Ord. No. 2019-02-06 , § I, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 58-121. - Illegal parking at City Springs. 
(a)  The following activities related to parking shall not be permitted at City Springs: 
(1)  No person shall stop, leave standing or park any passenger vehicle, automobile, light truck, sport utility vehicle, or motorcycle, whether attended or unattended, in any area where a parking ticket is issued or a parking meter is installed for a longer period of time than has been paid for or the maximum time indicated for the area by an appropriate sign or other appropriate notice, as applicable; 
(2)  No person shall leave standing or park any passenger vehicle, automobile, light truck, sport utility vehicle, or motorcycle, whether attended or unattended, on the roadway side of a vehicle already stopped, standing or parked at the curb; 
(3)  No person shall stop, leave standing or park any passenger vehicle, automobile, light truck, sport utility vehicle, or motorcycle, whether attended or unattended, in any area in City Springs designated as a no parking area by appropriate signage or other appropriate notice; 
(4)  No unauthorized person shall stop, leave standing or park any passenger vehicle, automobile, light truck, sport utility vehicle, or motorcycle, whether attended or unattended, in any area in City Springs designated as a reserved parking area by appropriate signage or other appropriate notice. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle on official business. 
(c)  Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited in designated areas in City Springs, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice thereof. If there is a conflict between official on-street parking signage and associated parking meters with respect to days, hours of enforcement, and/or maximum parking times, the information contained in the parking signage shall apply. Whenever a particular section does not state that official parking control signs are required, the section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. The presence of signs shall not be required to enforce parking prohibitions of general application as provided for in this chapter or state law. 
(d)  Within areas expressly designated by the city, food trucks permitted in accordance with chapter 26, article IX of the Sandy Springs Code of Ordinances shall only be subject to the provisions of subsection (a) not otherwise in conflict with its city issued permit, and thereinafter must comply with all further applicable provisions herein. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05-14 , § II, 5-15-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-21 , § I, 7-17-2018; Ord. No. 2019-02-06 , § I, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 58-122. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article, including issuance of citations for vehicles parked in restricted areas, shall be the responsibility of the parking management service, code enforcement officials of the city operating under the community development department and/or the police chief or his designee. Parking management service means the private vendor retained by the City of Sandy Springs that employs personnel (parking management agents) sworn by the city and authorized to issue parking citations for illegally parked vehicles that violate the provisions of Sandy Springs City Code section 58-121. 
(b)  A citation issued under this article shall be either left with the vehicle or delivered to the person in possession thereof. For purposes of enforcement, it shall be presumed that the registered owner of said vehicle is in control or possession thereof. 
(1)  The first three occurrences of any infraction listed in section 58-121 or combination thereof shall be punishable by a $25.00 civil fine for each infraction. Any fine issued under this subsection not paid within 30 days of issuance shall incur an additional late charge of $25.00. 
(2)  The fourth and every subsequent occurrence of any infraction listed in section 58-121 or combination thereof shall be punishable by the impounding of the vehicle and having same removed from public property at City Springs at the expense of the owner, and charging the owner(s) storage. 
(c)  In addition to any fine imposed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, should any sworn police officer find any motor vehicle in violation of any infraction listed in section 58-121 that creates an operational or public safety hazard, he or she shall have the right to impound the vehicle and to have same removed from public property at City Springs at the expense of the owner, and charge the owner(s) storage. 
(d)  Violation of the provisions of Sandy Springs Code of Ordinances section 58-121 shall be non-criminal. The imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to section 58-121 shall not be a conviction and shall not be a part of the criminal record of the person upon which such a penalty is imposed. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05-14 , § II, 5-15-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-21 , § I, 7-17-2018; Ord. No. 2019-02-06 , § I, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 58-123. - Payment and appeal. 
(a)  The person receiving a citation for violation of this section may pay the civil fine by return mail to the municipal court of the city or its designated receiver within 21 days of the issuance of the citation or may request a hearing within 21 days to appeal the issuance of the citation. The burden of proof shall be on the city. The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence; provided, however, the aforementioned presumption in section 58-122(b) of this article shall apply. Upon denial of the appeal thereof, the municipal court may impose a fine as provided by law. 
(b)  Should the violator elect to appeal the issuance of the citation described herein to the municipal court, the municipal court, pursuant to the provisions of section 1-10 of the Code of Ordinances, is authorized to impose a civil monetary penalty against persons who violate this section in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such violation. Upon the proper filing of an appeal within 21 days of the issuance of the citation, the late fees described in section 58-122(b) of this division will be suspended. 
(c)  Any citation that remains unpaid after 60 days of issuance shall be turned over to the City of Sandy Springs or Sandy Springs Police Department to be adjudicated. 
( Ord. No. 2018-05-14 , § II, 5-15-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07-21 , § I, 7-17-2018; Ord. No. 2019-02-06 , § I, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 58-124. - Free public parking. 
Free parking shall be available to the general public at all designated parking spaces within the defined City Springs area for up to two hours maximum on a first come first serve basis. This section shall not apply to valet parking and associated spaces. Parking shall only be allowed in excess of two hours in designated subsurface parking spaces within the defined City Springs area, subject to posted rates and other applicable restrictions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, during events at City Springs the city reserves the right to charge event rates for any designated parking areas within the defined City Springs area. 
( Ord. No. 2019-02-06 , § I, 2-5-2019) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Chapter 105 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Building regulations authorized, § 1.03(b)(3). 
State Law reference— Building standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 105-1—105-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.; application of building and fire codes to existing buildings. O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-19. - State minimum standards adopted. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council to enforce the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code. 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code. 
(6)  International Fire Code. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(8)  International Residential Code. 
(b)  The following appendices of said codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby referenced as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Building Code appendices H, I, J, K. 
(2)  International Residential Code appendices G, J, O. 
(3)  International Plumbing Code appendices C, I. 
(c)  The following codes, the latest editions and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Existing Building Code. 
(d)  The city also adopts the state minimum standard codes as defined by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9). 
(e)  Construction classification and building height. Any new building or structure designed or intended to be more than three stories in height in any respect and which individually or in aggregate with other principal buildings or structures on the same site exceeds 100,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA), within the confined exterior walls of the structures whether occupiable or non-occupiable, shall, irrespective of any conflicting allowances or provisions of any other standard, code or ordinance having force and effect in the corporate limits of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, be of Type I or Type II construction defined in chapter 6 of the 2012 International Building Code as amended by the State of Georgia. This regulation shall not be used to relax or reduce any requirement in Table 503, Allowable Building Heights and Areas, or any other section of the current adopted International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art., 1, § 1), 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2007-07-44, § 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 2007-07-44, § 1, 7-17-2007; Ord. No. 2009-01-01, 1-20-2009; Ord. No. 2016-08-23 , § I, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 105-20. - International Property Maintenance Code. 
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the City of Sandy Springs, one at the office of the city clerk and two at the office of community development department, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Sandy Springs for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the offices stated above are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of as if fully set out in this section with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 2 of the ordinance from which this section 105-20 derived. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Insert "City of Sandy Springs" 
Section 103.1 Change "Department of Property Maintenance" to "Department of Community Development." 
Section 103.5 Delete section and Insert "Fees shall be as determined by the Authority having Jurisdiction and appropriately posted. " 
Section 106.2 Add sentence: "A citation without prior notice of violation may be served upon owner of property where a notice of any violation had previously been served within a 24-month period prior to the new violation." 
Section 106.4 Add sentence: "Penalties assessed for each violation shall be either a fine of up to $1,000.00 or a term of incarceration of up to 6 month[s], or both." 
Section 107.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Notice to person responsible. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, if a notice is issued, it is given in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3. The building official shall have the power to issue subpoenas requiring occupants, residents, owners, or parties in interest of buildings under inspection, investigation, or who have been accused of a violation this article to appear in Sandy Springs Municipal Court. The building official or its designee shall also have the power to issue subpoenas to occupants, residents, owners, or parties in interest to produce written records related to the property under inspection or investigation. 
Section 302.4 Insert "10 inches" 
Chapter 3, General Requirements, Section 303, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by the City of Sandy Springs, is hereby amended by the addition of Section 303.3 following Section 303.2, to read as follows: 
Section 303.3 Discharge of Swimming Pools. The discharge of water from a swimming pool, regardless of location, size, or use type (public or private), into the environment shall be governed by the following criteria, depending on the type of occurrence: 
Section 303.3.1 Major Discharges. The discharge of chlorinated swimming pool water in an amount exceeding that which is necessary for routine back flushing of a filtration system, as a result of normal use or that occurs as a result of overflow caused by precipitation. Quantities exceeding these occurrences shall be required to conform to the following criteria: 
• Pool water shall not be discharged directly into any waters of State of Georgia. 
• Notice of intent to discharge/drain a swimming pool must be submitted to the City of Sandy Springs at least two (2) weeks in advance of the proposed event. 
• Pool water must sit at least two (2) weeks after the last addition of chlorine or until the level of chlorine is below 0.1 mg/l. This is the Reference Dose based on the United States Environmental Protection Agency 2006 Edition of Drinking Water Standards and Health Advisories. It is an estimate of a daily oral exposure to the human population (including sensitive subgroups) that is likely to be without an appreciable risk of deleterious effects during a lifetime. 
• The ph of the water must be between 6.5 and 8.5 before it is discharged (this represents a neutral range for discharge water that is neither acidic nor basic in nature). 
• Discharges shall not be allowed to create erosive conditions. 
• Discharge the water in a manner that will prevent nuisance conditions (such as creation of odors and mosquito breeding areas). 
• Pool water shall not be discharged onto the property of an adjacent homeowner, without notification and unless a dedicated drainage easement exists in the path of discharge. 
• Discharges to the environment should be directed over a vegetated surface to allow filtration to occur. 
• Pool water shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer system without prior approval from the local sewer authority (Fulton County Government). Additionally, as a disinfectant, chlorinated pool water is generally not desirable as an additive to a system reliant on microorganisms for effective operation (unless de-chlorinated to the standard listed herein). 
• Pool water shall not be discharged directly into the storm sewer system, unless water has been de-chlorinated to a concentration of <0.1 mg/l. 
Section 303.3.2 Minor Discharges: the discharge of chlorinated swimming pool water for the purposes of routine maintenance of filtration systems (back-flushing filters), as a result of normal use or as a result of overflow due to precipitation shall meet the following criteria: 
• Pool water shall not be discharged directly into any waters of State of Georgia. 
• Discharges shall not be allowed to create erosive conditions. 
• Discharge the water in a manner that will prevent nuisance conditions (such as creation of odors and mosquito breeding areas). 
• Pool water shall not be discharged onto the property of an adjacent homeowner, without notification and unless a dedicated drainage easement exists in the path of discharge. 
• Discharges to the environment should be directed over a vegetated surface to allow filtration to occur. 
• Pool water shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer system without prior approval from the local sewer authority (Fulton County Government). 
• Pool water shall not be discharged directly into the storm sewer system, unless water has been de-chlorinated to a concentration of <0.1 mg/l. 
Section 507 STORM DRAINAGE 
Section 507.1 General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
Section 507.2 Existing Stormwater Management Facilities. Where no maintenance covenant or agreement has been recorded to define maintenance responsibility, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the operational characteristics of any stormwater management facility (including ditches, pipes, or detention basins) located on their property pursuant to city requirements and as designed, to keep the access easements free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt, or debris. 
Section 507.3 Detention Facilities. Detention facilities shall be maintained such that the storage capacity and/ or function of any stormwater basin, pond or other impoundment, whether natural or manmade, shall not be removed or diminished without written approval of the City. 
Section 507.4 Maintain. The term maintain shall include removal of sediment, vegetative growth, debris, or trash that reduces or hinders the facility from performing as intended. 
Section 507.5 Inspection. Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 
Section 602.3 Insert "October 1st and April 1st" 
(Ord. No. 2006-08-61, §§ 1, 2, 8-15-2006; Ord. No. 2007-07-44, § 1, 7-17-2007; Ord. No. 2010-10-41, §§ 1, 2, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2010-11-42, §§ 1, 2, 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 105-21. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder are guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 11), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-22. - Other standards. 
The owner or operator of a building containing residential units shall install equipment to determine the quantity of water that is provided to the tenants and used in the common areas of such a building; and the owner of such a building shall charge tenants separately for water and wastewater service based on usage as determined through the use of such equipment or allocation methodology. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01-05, § 1, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 105-23. - Commercial car wash water recycling. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to reduce water consumption from commercial car wash facilities by requiring all new conveyor car washes to install operational recycled water systems. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this ordinance, have the meanings defined in this section: 
(1)  In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash in which a driver pulls into a bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
(2)  Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash in which a car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside the vehicle. 
(3)  Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
(4)  Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash in which the customers wash their own cars with spray wands and brushes. 
(c)  Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. All new commercial conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, shall be required to install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50 percent of water utilized shall be recycled. 
(d)  Applicability. 
(1)  This section applies to all new conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, regardless of the water source. 
(2)  The provisions of this section do not apply to conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before January 1, 2011. 
(3)  The provisions of this section do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
( Ord. No. 2013-05-05 , § 1, 5-7-2013) 
Secs. 105-24—105-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 105-40. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction is referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 1), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-41. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. In general, the construction codes adopted in this article are hereby declared to be remedial, and is construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city, nor any employee thereof, is liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 2), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-42. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Conflict with other provisions or requirements. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement is applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes are considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard is enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions are enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(d)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, are maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, are maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, is responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 3), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-43. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system is made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems are made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 4), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-44. - Building department. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge is known as the building official. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board of appeals, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes are defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit a report each year covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of appeals during said year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 5), 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2009-03-12, § III, 3-17-2009) 
Sec. 105-45. - Building official. 
(a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Necessary enforcement of provisions. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  Legal authority to enter. When the building official shall have first obtained legal authority to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice is in writing and is given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, are determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 6), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-46. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  Changed occupancy. When required, any owner, authorized agent, or con-tractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits are required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, is filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application is signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work is deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information is specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal," or its equivalent, be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. The height is the vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. 
Grade plane. A reference plane representing the weighted mean of the finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet (1,829 mm) from the building between the structure and a point six feet (1,829 mm) from the building. On extreme lots, the top of a retaining sub-wall shall be used in the determination of average grade. The retaining sub-wall shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer is affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional is an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(4)  Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(5)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(6)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. These drawings shall contain a statement of the proposed height of any existing or proposed structure. 
(7)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas are identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility is identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction, and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads, and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue a permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect, or locate said building; and it is the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It is the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before he is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with its license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. An affidavit containing the contractor's license number and a statement of responsibility shall be required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued is construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions are in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they are responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place, a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed is retained by the building official and the other set is returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings are kept at the site of work and is open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the building official have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, system before obtaining the necessary permits are subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit is paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the building official. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit is denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing buildings. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record is made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (h)(6) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection is made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit and work hours. 
a.  Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located at a prominent location within five feet of a right-of-way at approximately five feet above grade, parallel to and facing the street within the right-of-way and prominently visible from the right-of-way. The permit shall be located such that the building official or the building official's representative shall be able to conveniently and safely access the permit and make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
b.  Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts notice of the allowable work hours that are stipulated within the city noise ordinance (section 38-81 et seq.). The allowable work hours notice shall be prominently posted at all primary points of construction access to the site, at the permit posting location in a position readily visible without opening any enclosure and within any enclosure containing permit materials, and at all primary points of construction access to the interior of any building within which construction activity occurs. The allowable work hours notices shall be located prominently at eye level. The allowable work hour notices shall be maintained in such positions by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Footing inspection. The footing inspection is to be made after trenches are excavated and reinforcement rods are in place. 
2.  Foundation inspection. The foundation inspection is to be made after the forms have been erected and the reinforcing steel is in place. 
3.  Underslab inspection. The underslab inspection is to be made after trenches are excavated and all electrical conduit and plumbing pipe have been installed. 
4.  Slab inspection. The slab inspection is to be made after the steel, wire and vapor barrier are in place. 
5.  Rough inspection. The rough framing inspection is to be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking, and bracing are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
6.  Final inspection. The final building inspection is to be made after the building is complete and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection. The underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches have been excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is in place. 
2.  Underslab inspection. The underslab inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches have been excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is in place. 
3.  Wall cover inspection. The wall cover inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, conduit have been installed and before the installation of any wall membrane. 
4.  Ceiling cover inspection. The ceiling cover inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, conduit have been installed and before the installation of any ceiling membrane. 
5.  Temporary power pole inspection. The temporary power pole (T-pole) inspection is to be made after the pole has been erected and the meter and all subsequent wiring has been installed and before connection to the provider. 
6.  Temporary power inspection. The temporary power inspection is to be made after the meter and all subsequent wiring has been installed up to the service panel, and at least one GFCI circuit has been installed and before connection to the provider. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection. The pluming underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. The pluming rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection. The final pluming inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
4.  Note. See state plumbing code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection. The mechanical underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection. The mechanical rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Wall cover inspection. The wall cover inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, conduit have been installed and before the installation of any wall membrane. 
4.  Ceiling cover inspection. The ceiling cover inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, conduit have been installed and before the installation of any ceiling membrane. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection. The gas rough-in piping inspection is to be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection. The final gas piping inspection is to be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Wall cover inspection. The wall cover inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, conduit have been installed and before the installation of any wall membrane. 
4.  Ceiling cover inspection. The ceiling cover inspection is to be made after all wires, boxes, guards, conduit have been installed and before the installation of any ceiling membrane. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection. The energy foundation inspection is to be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection. The energy frame inspection is to be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection. The final inspection for energy is to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release is given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection and acceptance of as-built drawings, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
1.  As-built drawings. Site development as-built drawings, containing a boundary survey, location, elevation, height, and square footage of buildings, parking areas, utilities, walls, and stormwater facilities, pertinent site development data, and any other requirements of the community development director shall be submitted to and approved by the department prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
e.  Multiphase/level certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a multiphase/level structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction and life safety codes, and final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of completion for the building shell. Each individual unit within, shall be permitted and inspected as a separate unit. 
f.  Multiphase/level certificate of occupancy. Upon issuance of a certificate of completion as set forth in subsection (i)(1)e of this section, the building official shall be authorized to issue certificates of occupancy on a floor-by-floor or structure-by-structure basis upon the approval of the building officer. The building officer shall not issue an approval until there has been a preconstruction meeting. A preconstruction meeting shall address safe egress for the occupants and workers, the completion of common spaces, safety of the occupants during the construction phase or phases, a schedule of the work to be completed, parking separation, site access for workers, and all staging areas. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued upon satisfactory completion of construction of a multiphase/level units and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction and life safety codes, and all inspections have been passed. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system is notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It is the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations are accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit is filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. Signs are required in every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, are marked on plates or approved design which is supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, are replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 7), 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2007-07-43, § 1, 7-17-2007; Ord. No. 2007-08-48, § 1, 8-21-2007; Ord. No. 2008-08-, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 2016-08-25 , § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 105-47. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 8), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-48. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Powers. The board of appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (b)(1) in this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(b)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. The board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures, or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required is commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance is deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal is in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals are in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(4)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Establishment. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 60 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. The date and time of each meeting, as well as agenda items to be considered, is publicized in the same manner as meetings of the council. 
(2)  Decisions. The board of appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision is promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and is open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision is sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy is kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board is final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(3)  Meetings and agenda on file. Copies of all board meeting and agenda shall be files with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 2, § 9), 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2006-12-94, § 1(ch. 2, art. 5, §§ 2—6), 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 2009-03-12, § IV, 3-17-2009) 
Charter reference— Authority to enact rules and regulations; election of chairperson, § 2.13(g); appointed boards, § 2.13. 
Secs. 105-49—105-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRENCHING 

Sec. 105-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the earth's surface, including its sides, walls, or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions as results of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth to width relationship, an excavation may become a trench. 
OSHA means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or successor agency. 
Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing, or controlling an excavation or trench. 
Trench means a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of the trench is not greater than 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 3, § 1), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-71. - Prohibition. 
No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind whatsoever shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in the compliance with the provisions of this article and in compliance with any applicable laws of the state or of the United States or any rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or any other state or federal governmental entity or department promulgating rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 3, § 2), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-72. - Adoption of federal regulations. 
All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly 29 CFR 1926, Excavations, Trenching, and Shoring (29 CFR 1926.650—1926.653), as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, are adopted as a part of this article the same as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 3, § 3), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-73. - Certificate required. 
(a)  No equipment operator or supervisory personnel shall participate in any excavation or trenching or in any way work in an excavation or trench unless such person holds a valid certificate evidencing satisfactory completion of a required educational program on safe trench/excavation practices. No other person shall participate in or work in any excavation or trenching site unless a certificate holder is present at the excavation or trench site where work is being performed. 
(b)  In the event any person who holds a valid certificate from the city is found to be in violation of the safety standards or requirements on any job site, the certificate may be revoked after notice and hearing as herein provided. In the event of revocation, the certificate may be reinstalled one time upon repeat by the person of the educational program required for issuance of the initial certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 3, § 4), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-74. - Permit required. 
(a)  No excavation or trenching is performed until a permit or authorization for same has been obtained from the city. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits are conspicuously posted upon the job site. 
(b)  No permit or authorization is issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 3, § 5), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-75. - Inspection. 
The city shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify existence of required certificates, and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards adopted in section 105-72. The inspectors may operate pursuant to a contract between the city and a third-party entity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 3, §§ 6, 7), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-76. - Violations. 
The city shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify existence of required certificates, and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards adopted in section 105-72 . 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 3, § 7), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-77. - Appeals. 
Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal in a manner consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 3, § 8), 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 105-78—105-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND HOUSING STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-100. - Maintenance of proper sanitary conditions on premises required; procedures; enforcement. 
(a)  Every person, whether owner, tenant, agent or employee, owning, holding, or occupying property in the city shall, at all times, maintain the property, whether a vacant lot or otherwise, in a clean and sanitary condition, keeping all weeds cut, wastepaper, trash and other rubbish of every sort cleaned off of the property. Said duty to maintain property in a clean and sanitary condition shall include the duty to cut and remove undergrowth, such as kudzu, briars, weeds in excess of 24 inches in height, honeysuckle, other vines and seedlings, whenever such undergrowth becomes a nuisance, to persons residing in the area or operating businesses in the area. If such undergrowth exists upon an unimproved lot, the planning and zoning director may reduce the extent to which the property must be maintained in such condition, provided there are no imminent threats to public health and safety. 
(b)  It is the duty of the community development director or a designee thereof to give five days written notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and take reasonable steps to deliver in person to any owner of property or other person violating this section to appear before the city council to show cause why these provisions have not been complied with. In addition, the community development director or a designee shall immediately post a notification upon the property in violation of this section in order to provide visual notification to property owners for a period of five consecutive days. 
(1)  In lieu of inability to contact owners in other manners prescribed in this section, posted notice shall serve as the official notice for the city council hearing on this matter. 
(2)  After a hearing, if it is deemed by the council that this section has not been complied with, such owner or other person is given five days to comply and if he fails or refuses to do so, the public works director shall thereupon cause the work to be done. 
(3)  For purposes of giving the notice to the owner of the property, as provided for herein, the person shown as the owner of said property on the ad valorem tax records of the city are sent such notice at the address shown thereon, unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property that owner is responsible for said violation. 
(4)  The council may, by majority vote, refer any and all cases described in this section to the municipal court, and all hearings heretofore described as being before the council may be before the municipal court if the council decides. 
(c)  When the public works director has caused weeds to be cut from any premises, or wastepaper, trash, or other rubbish removed, a notice is prepared assessing the cost of the cutting of those weeds, cleaning and rendering sanitary such vacant lot or other property against the owner, tenant, agent, or employee owning, occupying, or controlling the property. The cost of such action is a debtor lien upon the property so cleaned and rendered sanitary and a debt against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. The debtor lien shall date from the completion of the work on the property as declared under city council ordinance. 
(d)  A written statement is furnished by the city clerk to the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment provided for herein showing the amount of the assessment. It is the duty of the owner, agent, or other party in charge of the property subject to the assessment to pay the city within 30 days after the receipt of the statement the entire amount of the assessment against the property and the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in charge of the property. 
(e)  Any owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of property subject to assessment as provided herein who fails or refuses to pay to the city the amount of such assessment at the expiration of 30 days after the service of the notice of statement provided in this section, the city clerk shall issue an execution bearing date of its issuance in the name of the mayor and specifying the purpose for which it is issued against the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property subject to the assessment and also against the property of the owner, tenant, agent, or other party in control of the property upon which the work in question is performed. The execution shall assert and be a lien against the property from the day of the completion of the performance of the work hereinbefore described and shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date on which it is issued. For the purposes of this section, any period of less than one month is considered to be one month. 
(f)  The execution issued under these provisions are delivered to the chief of police or a designee thereof who shall execute the same by levying upon and selling the property described therein or so much thereof as may be necessary for the amount due the city from the doing of such work, together with all costs that may accrue thereon. The law applicable to the sales under other executions issued by this city shall apply to the levy, notice, advertisement and sale made under the execution, and the levying officer shall have authority to execute a deed to the purchaser when the property is sold and shall deliver the possession thereof to the purchaser within the time required by law as under tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 4, § 1), 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 105-101. - Overcrowding prohibited. 
(a)  Bedroom requirements. 
(1)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(2)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(b)  Overcrowding specifications. 
(1)  Number of occupants. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of table 1 as follows: 
TABLE 1  MINIMUM OCCUPANCY AREA REQUIREMENTS 

 
Notes: 
a See subsection (b)(3) of this section for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
;sup\sup;See subsection (b)(1) of this section for limitations on determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by table 1 shall not be included as sleeping area in determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with section 105-101(a). 
(3)  Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of table 1 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(c)  Exception. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency dwelling unit meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  An efficiency unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet. An efficiency unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet. These required areas are exclusive of the areas required by subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  The unit is provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance, and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front. 
(3)  The unit is provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower. 
(4)  The maximum number of occupants are three. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09-68, § 1(ch. 9, art. 4, § 3), 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 105-102—105-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MULTIFAMILY RENTAL HOUSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § V, adopted Dec. 6, 2016, repealed Div. 2 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 105-118—105-121 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2008-10-53, adopted Oct. 21, 2008; and Ord. No. 2011-10-16, adopted Oct. 4, 2011. 

Sec. 105-118. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified building inspector means any person inspecting for compliance with the various adopted codes who is a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or holds one of the following certifications from ICC: property maintenance and housing inspector, building inspector, building plan examiner or commercial combination inspector. 
Code compliance certificate means a certificate, substantially similar to exhibit A attached to the ordinance from which this division is derived and incorporated herein, executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in the inspection report attached thereto. 
Inspection report means a report, substantially similar to exhibit A attached to the ordinance dated December 6, 2016, from which this division is amended and incorporated herein, attached to the code compliance certificate and describing the minimum requirements for inspection of each unit. The inspection report may be modified from time to time by the director of community development to comply with the adoption, revision or amendment of all applicable laws, certifications or standards. 
Lease means any written or oral agreement which sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
Multifamily rental dwelling means any multifamily structure, multifamily building, or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to, multiple-family dwellings, multiple-family apartment units, boardinghouses, rooming houses, group homes, and flats. 
Multifamily rental housing means any multifamily rental unit and/or any multifamily rental dwelling. 
Multifamily rental unit means any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one tenant, group of tenants, or family under one lease, or under terms of joint and severable liability. 
Occupancy means all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in premises. 
Owner-occupied means any part of a structure used as living quarters by the owner of said structure where other parts of the structure are used as multifamily rental units. Example: two-family dwelling, owner occupies one flat; rooming house, owner occupies one unit. 
Premises means any lot or piece of land inclusive of the multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § V, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 105-119. - Fee and certificate required. 
(a)  Occupation tax. All owners of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units within the city that receive income for use of four or more such dwellings or units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 for having a location or office within the city (i) shall be subject to an occupation tax as provided in this division and (ii) shall provide to the city, prior to September 1, 2006, a code compliance certificate covering 100 percent of the multifamily rental units within the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of the certification. Said code compliance certificate shall be certified by the owner that all units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. For the initial year of construction, this section shall not apply to new construction or rehabilitation of a multifamily rental dwelling provided proper permits are obtained from the city. 
(b)  Inspection. Upon initial inspection of such dwellings or units, should a certified building inspector determine that further work is necessary to comply with the minimum standards set forth herein, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the chief building official outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If such plan is accepted by the chief building official as reasonable and justified, an extension may be granted for up to one year for completion of repairs and compliance with this division. No extension shall be granted if life safety issues are involved and any such units shall not be leased until brought into compliance. 
(c)  Compliance certificate. After submission of the initial code compliance certificate, each owner shall submit a code compliance certificate annually, commencing on January 1, 2007, with their business license renewal. Such subsequent code compliance certificate shall cover at least 20 percent of the units, provided all units shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five years. All units inspected shall be listed individually on the code compliance certificate submitted to the city by the certified building inspector. Furthermore, exterior inspections shall cover at least 20 percent of the buildings, provided all buildings shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five years. All units inspected shall be listed individually and submitted to the city by the certified building inspector. 
(d)  Written record of inspection. Furthermore, each owner and certified building inspector shall keep a written record of all inspections for each unit including the date of the inspection, items inspected and all violations, if any, observed. Such records shall be presented to the city within ten business days after such request is made in writing to the inspector. Failure to provide such records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for those units. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § V, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 105-120. - Failure to provide code compliance certificate. 
(a)  Failure to provide the code compliance certificate as provided herein shall be a violation of this division and is subject to those penalties contained herein and in section 1-10. 
(b)  Further, said failure, upon a judicial determination, shall be a condition constituting probable cause, and may subject said multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental units to inspection by the city building official and/or the city fire marshal at a fee as determined by the city council that covers all costs of such inspection by the city. Said inspection by the city, if required, shall be at a sole cost of the owner and failure to pay said cost shall result in a lien being placed on the premises as provided for collection of taxes. 
(c)  Failure to pay the occupational tax as provided herein shall be a violation of this division and is subject to those penalties set forth in this division. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from enforcement of the state minimum standard codes as provided in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § V, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 105-121. - Penalty for false certification and false inspection. 
(a)  An owner who knowingly participates in furnishing a code compliance certificate to the city which contains a false certification that all multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate shall be guilty of a violation of this Code for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the certification is shown to be false and can be fined up to $1,000.00, or imprisoned for up to one year, or any combination of these, by the court for each violation. 
(b)  A certified building inspector who furnishes an inspection report which knowingly contains fraudulent information that a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit meets the minimum housing standards of the city as shown by the inspection report contained in exhibit A of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and can be fined up to $1,000.00, or imprisoned for up to one year, or any combination of these, by the court for each violation. In addition, a building inspector's right to submit inspection reports to the city may be suspended for a stated period of time, up to five years, by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2016-12-37 , § V, 12-6-2016) 
Chapter 107 - IMPACT FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, adopted Oct. 18, 2016, repealed Ch. 107 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 107, §§ 107-21, 107-22, 107-26, 107-31—107-41, 107-46—107-54, 107-56—107-60, 107-81—107-94, 107-100—107-103, 107-105—107-108, 107-111—107-115, 107-120—107-123, 107-125—107-134, 107-136—107-139, 107-141—107-144, 107-146—107-150, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2008-02-08, adopted Feb. 19, 2008. 

Sec. 107-1. - Legislative findings. 
The governing authority of the City of Sandy Springs has considered the feasibility of imposing development impact fees and finds, determines, and declares that: 
(1)  The Georgia General Assembly, through the enactment of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-71-1—36-71-13, as amended, authorizes Sandy Springs to impose development impact fees. 
(2)  Pursuant to the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-5, Sandy Springs established a development impact fee advisory committee that assisted and advised Sandy Springs with regard to the original development and adoption of its development impact fees. 
(3)  The City of Sandy Springs, Georgia has adopted and maintains a comprehensive plan which, through approval of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, qualifies Sandy Springs as a "qualified local government" pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989. 
(4)  Sandy Springs must expand its public facilities (as defined herein) in order to maintain its adopted level of service standards if new development is to be accommodated without decreasing the level of service standards available to all residents and businesses in the city. This expansion of its public facilities must be done in order to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and the general welfare of the citizens of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
(5)  The imposition of development impact fees is a preferred method of ensuring the availability of public facilities necessary to accommodate new growth and development. 
(6)  Each of the types of land development described herein will create new demand for the acquisition or expansion of public facilities and the construction of public facility improvements. 
(7)  The development impact fees established herein are derived from, are based upon, and do not exceed a proportionate share of the costs of providing additional public facility improvements, necessitated by the new land developments for which such fees are imposed. 
(8)  The development impact fees established herein are based on the comprehensive plan as it may be amended from time to time, the portion of the comprehensive plan entitled "Capital Improvements Element" as most recently adopted and as may be amended from time to time, and plans and studies prepared by or affecting Sandy Springs from time to time that are of pertinence and relevance to the need for and provision of public facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-2. - Intent and purpose. 
This chapter is intended to assist in the implementation of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia Comprehensive Plan and the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, and to accomplish the following: 
(1)  To ensure that adequate public parks and recreation areas and improvements are available to serve new growth and development by assuring that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide such parks and recreation areas and such parks and recreation improvements in Sandy Springs, consistent with the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  To fully comply with each and every relevant provision of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-71-1—36-71-13, and shall be interpreted and implemented to so comply. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent or prohibit private development agreements between property owners or developers and the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-3. - Short title, authority, and applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Sandy Springs, Georgia, 2016, as amended" or the short title of "Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(b)  This chapter has been prepared and adopted by the city council of Sandy Springs, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of Sandy Springs, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this chapter. 
(d)  This chapter shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Sandy Springs, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-4. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
The provisions of this chapter are to effectively carry out the need for the city to protect the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. 
(1)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter: 
a.  In the case of a conflict between words or phrases as used in this chapter and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of the city, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this chapter. 
b.  In the case of a conflict between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
c.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
d.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
e.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
f.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
g.  The conjunctions "or" and "and/or" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
h.  The use of "either &hellip or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
i.  The word "includes" or "including" and the phrase "such as" shall not limit a term to the specific example or examples given but are intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
j.  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this chapter are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this chapter. 
(2)  Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
Administrator means the city manager of Sandy Springs, Georgia, or the city manager's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
ARC means the Atlanta Regional Commission, also referred to as "the regional commission". 
Building permit means the document issued by the city authorizing the construction, repair, alteration of or addition to a structure. For the purposes of this chapter, a building permit also means an interior finishes permit. 
Capital equipment and/or facility means electronic or mechanical equipment, vehicles, buildings or other improvements which increase the service capacity of a public facility and which have an expected useful life of ten years or more. 
Capital improvement includes land acquisition, site improvements, capital equipment, and capital facilities, but excludes maintenance and operation. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the Sandy Springs Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the city council. 
City means the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia. 
City council means the City Council of Sandy Springs, Georgia. 
Commencement of construction, for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Comprehensive plan means the Sandy Springs Plan or planning elements as adopted or amended by the city council in accord with O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq. and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
DCA means the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Development impact fee assessment means the determination of the amount of an impact fee due for issuance of a particular building permit. 
Development impact fee collection means the receipt by the city of the amount due for an impact fee assessed for a particular building permit. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms of a building or portion thereof constructed with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities designed for and limited to use as living quarters for one family for periods of more than 30 consecutive days. A dwelling unit may be a single-family detached home, or an apartment or condominium in a multifamily structure. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the city council. 
Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Fee assessment. See "Development impact fee assessment." 
Fee collection. See "Development impact fee collection." 
Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest, with the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees that are required by this chapter has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. In the absence of an express transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees, the right or entitlement shall be deemed "not to run with the land." 
Fiscal period means the city's 12-month accounting period beginning on July 1 of a given year and continuing through June 30 of the subsequent year, or such other time period as may be determined by the city council. 
Floor area means the gross heated horizontal areas of the floors of a building exclusive of open porches and garages, measured from the interior face of the exterior walls of the building. Also referred to as the "gross floor area". 
Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this chapter or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by the city in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using methods of financial analysis acceptable to the administrator for determination of "net present value." 
Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by the city shall be considered a project improvement. 
Property owner means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities means: (a) parks, open space, recreation areas and recreation facilities; and (b) public safety facilities, including fire, police and law enforcement, warning and communications facilities; and (c) roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any other components of local, state or federal streets or highways. 
Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-5. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any person who after the effective date of this chapter engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Service areas: 
The city limits of the City of Sandy Springs, Georgia, constitute a single service area for all public facilities subject to impact fees under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-6. - Construction not subject to impact fees. 
(a)  The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this chapter, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
(1)  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development (as defined in this chapter) that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
(2)  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
(3)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not produce additional demand for parks and recreation facilities over and above those produced by the principal buildings or structures. 
(4)  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
(5)  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
(6)  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential dwelling unit that may increase the floor area or number of rooms but does not increase the number of housing units. 
(7)  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, detached garage or utility shed, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool or tennis court. 
(b)  A person claiming to be not subject to impact fees under this section shall submit to the administrator information and documentation sufficient to permit the administrator to determine whether such claim is correct. Any such claim must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit except in the case of a private development agreement approved by the city council under section 107-32, below. Any such claims not so applied for shall be deemed waived. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-7. - Grandfathered projects. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(b)  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of this chapter may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this chapter, provided that: 
(1)  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be or have been paid in full; and, 
(2)  Said construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, not to exceed 180 days from the date of initial issuance of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-8. - Method of impact fee calculation. 
(a)  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the capital improvements element, and which: 
(1)  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
(2)  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same public facilities category and for which an impact fee is imposed to otherwise finance. 
(c)  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this chapter shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of the city, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
(d)  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the capital improvements element. 
(e)  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element. 
(f)  The city shall be entitled to collect an administrative fee of up to an additional three percent of a development impact fee at the time of collection as to offset the costs of administering this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-9. - Fee assessment and payment. 
(a)  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by the city, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure other than a shopping center, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. Shopping centers shall be assessed a single impact fee, in accordance with Attachment A, as a single use without regard to its individual tenants or changes in future tenants. 
(c)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
(1)  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use category and the appropriate development impact fee. 
(2)  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the land use categories shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
(3)  If the land use of the proposed development is not similar to a land use category shown on the adopted fee schedule, then an appropriate fee may be determined by the administrator as an individual assessment in accordance with the individual assessment determinations section of this chapter. 
(4)  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-10. - Timing of impact fee assessment and payment. 
(a)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit and collected in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  All development impact fees shall be collected no earlier than at the time of issuance of a building permit, or with the administrator's approval no later than as a prerequisite to issuance of an interior finishes permit or a certificate of occupancy for the building or building shell. 
(c)  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property, whichever is earliest. 
(d)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Prior to the completion of the project, and as a condition to the issuance of an interior finishes permit or a certificate of occupancy, as applicable, the developer shall recertify in writing to the administrator the actual land use or uses of the project, and shall present an architect's certificate of the actual gross square footage of floor area attributable to each use. 
(2)  In the event that the actual land use or uses and/or the actual gross square footage applicable to the actual land use or uses differs from that originally certified, and in the event that the impact fee applicable to the actual land use or uses and/or gross square footage exceeds the impact fee previously paid, the developer shall be required to pay the amount of the excess as a condition to the issuance of an interior finishes permit or a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  The amount of the excess shall be based upon the impact fee schedule in effect on the date the interior finishes permit or the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(4)  If the actual gross square footage constructed after the issuance of the building permit is less than the amount originally certified, the developer shall be entitled to a refund of the excess portion of the fee in accordance with this chapter. 
(e)  Change of use, redevelopment, expansion or modification. 
(1)  Any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the original building permit shall result in the assessment of such additional fee, net of the previous fee paid, as would otherwise have been due. 
(2)  Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the original building permit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-11. - Individual assessment determinations. 
An individual assessment of development impact fees for a particular property or proposed use may be established as follows: 
(1)  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established on the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. The individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in the city or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
(4)  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this chapter. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
(5)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by the city, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-12. - Fee certification. 
Upon application to the administrator, a property owner or developer may receive 1) a certification of the development impact fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A, or 2) a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. 
(1)  Certified fee schedule. 
a.  The administrator shall provide an applicant with a written certification of the impact fee schedule within five working days after the administrator's receipt of a completed application. 
b.  The fee schedule certified by the administrator shall establish the impact fee schedule for all land use categories for a period of 180 days from the date of certification. 
(2)  Certified fee determination for a particular project. 
a.  The administrator shall provide the applicant with a written certification of an individual fee determination requested for a particular project within 30 days after receipt of a completed application. The individual fee determination certified by the administrator shall establish the total impact fee for the particular proposed development for the 180-day period immediately following the date of such certification. 
b.  Notwithstanding the issuance of any certification of an individual fee determination for a particular development project, any additions to the proposed development different from the development identified in the original application shall negate any such certification. The applicable development impact fee shall thereafter be based on the fee schedule (Attachment A) in effect at the time the building permit is issued. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-13. - Exemption policy. 
(a)  The City of Sandy Springs recognizes that certain office, retail trade, hospitality and other business development projects provide extraordinary benefit in support of the economic advancement of the city's citizens over and above the access to jobs, goods and services that such uses offer in general. In addition, the city recognizes that fees, in some circumstances, can negatively affect the affordability of housing, particularly "workforce" housing. To encourage such development projects of public benefit to Sandy Springs, the city council may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for a business development project upon the determination and relative to the extent that the project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth, or that the affordability of a housing project may be increased, in accordance with exemption criteria adopted in this section. 
(b)  It is also recognized that the cost of system improvements otherwise foregone through exemption of any impact fee must be funded through revenue sources other than impact fees. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-14. - Process for exemption approval. 
An application for exemption shall be considered under the following procedures: 
(1)  An application for exemption approval must be made prior to or along with an application for the first building permit or other qualifying permit. Any exemptions not so applied for shall be deemed waived. 
(2)  A building permit may be issued upon approval of an exemption, or may be issued without payment of applicable impact fees following receipt of a complete exemption application and pending its approval, but a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a decision regarding the exemption has been made, or until such time that the application for exemption is otherwise withdrawn by the applicant and payment of impact fees has been made. 
(3)  Documentation must be provided that demonstrates the applicant's eligibility for an exemption. This documentation shall address, but need not be limited to, all applicable exemption criteria adopted herein. 
(4)  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether an application for exemption addresses the exemption criteria adopted herein and is complete. 
a.  The administrator may request additional information or documentation from the applicant in making this determination. Such determination shall be made within five working days of receipt of a complete application. 
b.  Upon a positive determination as to compliance with the exemption criteria and the appropriate amount of the exemption, the administrator will thereupon forward the application to the city council for consideration and action. 
c.  A negative determination by the administrator as to compliance with the exemption criteria may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
(5)  The city council shall determine the eligibility for and extent of exemption, in accordance with the applicable exemption criteria adopted herein. The application for exemption shall be placed on the agenda at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council that falls at least two weeks after a complete application for exemption has been received from the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-15. - Exemption criteria—Extraordinary economic development and employment growth. 
The following nonresidential projects may be considered for exemption, in whole or in part, from the payment of impact fees otherwise required by this chapter: 
(1)  Major construction project: Any nonresidential construction project involving the construction of new floor area, the expansion of an existing building or the renovation of existing floor space that will result in all of the following: 
a.  The creation of 100 or more new jobs occupying said space that meet or exceed the average wage level within the city; and, 
b.  A capital investment in the creation or renovation of the space of more than $5,000,000.00; and 
c.  A written commitment to remain in the new or renovated space for at least ten years. 
(2)  Minor construction project: Any nonresidential construction project involving the construction of new floor area, the expansion of an existing building or the renovation of existing floor space that will result in all of the following: 
a.  The creation of no fewer than 22 new jobs occupying said space that meet or exceed the average wage level within the city; and, 
b.  A capital investment in the creation or renovation of the space of more than $1,000,000.00; and 
c.  A written commitment to remain in the new or renovated space for at least seven years. 
(3)  The average wage level within the city shall be determined by the administrator from time to time based in credible data, such as reports from the U.S. Bureau of the Census or the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-16. - Exemption criteria—Affordable housing. 
The following residential projects may be considered for exemption, in whole or in part, from the payment of impact fees otherwise required by this chapter: 
(1)  Any housing project that proposes to create at least 150 new or replacement housing units and at least 20 percent of the units will be made available to individuals or families with annual incomes of no more than 120 percent of the annual median income of all households in Sandy Springs (as determined by the administrator from time to time based in credible data, such as reports from the U.S. Bureau of the Census). 
(2)  Any housing project of at least 150 housing units that proposes to replace at least 150 existing rental housing units with no less than 75 percent of the units intended for home ownership. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-17. - Reimbursement to impact fee fund. 
As part of the annual budgeting process, adequate funds shall be identified and transferred to the impact fee fund accounts equal to the amount of all exemptions granted by the city council during the preceding year. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-18. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
The city shall comply with all applicable accounting requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-8, which includes the following: 
(1)  Maintenance of funds. 
a.  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all city funds generally. 
b.  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements (parks and recreation, public safety and road improvements) and for administration fees collected. 
c.  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be allocated to each category of system improvements and the administration accounts in proportion to the impact fees collected, shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this chapter. 
(2)  Expenditures; restrictions. 
a.  Expenditures from the system improvements impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
b.  Expenditures from the administration account may be expended directly for administrative purposes, which may include required annual reporting or amendments to the capital improvements element) or transferred to the general fund to cover administrative costs. 
c.  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building, acquiring or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
d.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the following shall be considered general revenue of the city, and may be expended accordingly: 
1.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
2.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for previous expenditures made by the city for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and 
3.  Any portion of the fee collected for administration of the impact fee program. 
(3)  Annual financial report. 
a.  The director of the finance department shall prepare an annual report to the administrator as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and expended during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility. 
b.  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and included in the annual update report of the city's capital improvements element as required to be submitted to the regional commission and reviewed by DCA, in accordance with section 107-37. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-19. - Credits. 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-20. - Credits; restrictions. 
(a)  Except as provided in the following paragraph (b), no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of this chapter for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of the city, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements. 
(d)  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements as defined in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-21. - Granting of credits. 
(a)  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
(1)  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element; 
(2)  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and 
(3)  The city council shall approve said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
(b)  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for any particular public facilities category for which a development impact fee is imposed, unless a greater credit is authorized under a private contractual agreement executed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Any credit amount in excess of the impact fee due for any particular public facilities category may be carried over and applied to the impact fee due in the same public facilities category for another development by the developer, or to a successor in interest, within the city. 
(2)  To qualify as a "successor in interest" for entitlement to a credit, notice must have been given to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right of entitlement to the credit, including the name, mailing address and written, notarized authorization of the grantor and the name and mailing address of the grantee. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-22. - Guidelines for credit valuation. 
Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
(1)  Construction. For the construction of any system improvements by a developer (as defined in this chapter) or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the developer shall present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement. The administrator shall determine if the amount claimed is reasonable and appropriate. 
(2)  Land. For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value of the land so dedicated shall be the lesser of: the original cost of the land paid by the developer, or that value attributed to the property by the validated Fulton County Tax Appraisal at the time of dedication. 
(3)  Equipment. For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that the city would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less, and as determined to be reasonable and appropriate by the administrator. 
(4)  Money. For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the city, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
(5)  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the interest rate being earned on the city's impact fee funds, and the average annual inflation rate shall be that for the Consumer Price Index (the CPI) for the cost of money, or the average rate reported by the Engineering News Record for construction in general (the CCI) or building construction specifically (the BCI), as appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-23. - Credits; application. 
(a)  Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(b)  No credit shall be given for contributions of money or land and/or capital improvements made or dedicated prior to the effective date of the incorporation of the city. 
(c)  Credits shall be given only upon written application under the authority of the property owner or developer to the administrator. An applicant shall present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
(d)  The administrator, in his or her reasonable discretion, shall review all applications for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-24. - Credits for proposed construction of system improvements. 
(a)  Applicants for credit for construction of a system improvement shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications, and construction cost estimates to the administrator. 
(1)  If the administrator determines that such estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate, then the administrator shall determine credit for construction based upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates available to the city. 
(2)  The administrator shall provide the applicant with a letter or other certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. 
(3)  The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate and return such signed document to the administrator before credit will be given. The credit shall be nullified if the applicant fails to sign, date, and return such document within 60 days of the receipt of such letter or certificate from the administrator. 
(b)  Credit against development impact fees for new construction of system improvements otherwise due will not be provided until: 
(1)  The construction is completed and accepted by the city, the county, or the state, whichever is applicable; and 
(2)  A suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and approved by the administrator, when applicable. 
(c)  However, credit may be provided before completion of the specified facilities, in the discretion of the administrator, if adequate assurances are given by the applicant that the standards set out above will be met and if the applicant posts security as provided below for the costs of such construction. 
(1)  Security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement shall be posted with and approved by the administrator in an amount determined by the administrator. 
(2)  If the construction project will not be constructed within one year of the acceptance of the offer by the administrator, then the amount of the security shall be increased by ten percent compounded for each year of the life of the security. 
(d)  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-25. - Credit certificates. 
(a)  Credits shall be represented by a written certificate (the "credit certificate") setting forth the name of the person or entity to whom the credit certificate is issued, the date of the credit certificate, and the amount of the credit. Each credit certificate shall be signed, either manually or facsimile, by the city finance director with the seal of the city affixed thereto. 
(b)  The interest of a secured party shall not be effective and shall not be recognized by the city unless and until the city is in receipt of a written document satisfactory to the city signed by the secured party and the holder of the credit certificate verifying the creation of the security interest and directing the city to append the secured party's name to the credit certificate. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-26. - Transfer of credits. 
(a)  Credits are transferable from one holder to another and from one project to another provided that such credits shall apply only to impact fees assessed for the same category of system improvements for which the original credit was approved by the city, and provided further that the transfer is accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(b)  A transfer of credits shall only be effective upon surrender of the previous credit certificate signed and dated as of the date of the transfer by the certificate holder. 
(c)  If the previous credit certificate is subject to a security interest reflected in the credit certificate, the previous credit certificate shall also be accompanied by a written consent to transfer or release of security interest signed by the secured party. 
(d)  Upon compliance with the transfer provisions of this subsection, the city shall issue a new credit certificate in the name of the authorized transferee, with an applicable security interest attached, if applicable. 
(e)  A transfer from one holder to another not in compliance with the terms of this section shall not be recognized by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-27. - Credits; abandoned building permits. 
(a)  In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit becomes invalid, credit shall be given for the paid amount of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land. 
(b)  In accordance with the city's building code, a building permit shall be deemed invalid if no construction on the site authorized by the permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work is commenced. 
(c)  No extension of an invalidated building permit shall be authorized by the building official for any reason. Work may resume on such a site only through issuance of a new building permit, which will be subject to all fees required for such issuance at the time the application for the new permit is requested. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-28. - Refunds; eligibility. 
(a)  Upon the written request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
(1)  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or 
(2)  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
(b)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-29. - Notice of entitlement to a refund. 
When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to spend or encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor at the address shown on the application for development approval or to the assignee in interest of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-30. - Filing a request for a refund. 
A request for a refund shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-31. - Payment of refunds. 
(a)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
(b)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(c)  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the city for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-32. - Private development agreements. 
This chapter does not prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the city and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits for such system improvement costs incurred, provided that: 
(1)  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element; and 
(2)  The amount of any credit granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-33. - Private agreements; provisions. 
A private contractual agreement for system improvements, among other items, may include provisions that: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the city to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  Provide for construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
(3)  Provide for a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this chapter, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia and acceptable to the administrator, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-34. - Private agreements; procedure. 
(a)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review and negotiation, prior to submission to the city council. 
(b)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney as to form and sufficiency prior to consideration by the city council. 
(c)  Any private agreement must be presented to and approved by the city council prior to the issuance of the first building permit or other qualifying permit. 
(d)  Any private agreement shall be executed or approved by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording on the deed records. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-35. - Automatic annual fee schedule adjustment. 
The city council is authorized to automatically adjust the development impact fee schedule set forth in Attachment A to this chapter as necessary and appropriate from time to time. Automatic adjustments to the development impact fees, made pursuant to this section, shall be effective upon their adoption or at such subsequent date designated by the city council. 
(1)  Automatic adjustments to the development impact fees shall not exceed the change in the average annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the most recent calendar year compared to the average annual CPI used for the original adoption of the impact fee schedule or the last automatic adjustment, whichever most recently occurred. 
(2)  The base for computing any adjustment is the average annual Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers for the Southern Region (Current Series), published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-36. - Administrative review of impact. 
The city council may from time to time review impacts associated with classes of land uses and may adjust the development impact fee schedule for such class(es) accordingly or modify the development impact fee schedule to include such class(es) previously omitted. Such review may include but shall not be limited to differences in impact associated with location, density, configuration, and/or mix of land uses and development types. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-37. - Annual capital improvements element update report. 
Each year, a Capital Improvements Element Annual Update report shall be prepared based on the rules and regulations pertaining to impact fees in Georgia, as specified by the Development Impact Fee Act (DIFA) and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) documents Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements and the Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning. These three documents dictate the essential elements of an annual update, specifically the inclusion of a financial report and an updated schedule of improvements. 
(1)  Financial report. 
a.  The financial report is to be based on the annual audit completed for the most recent fiscal year, describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and expended during the fiscal year by category of public facility. 
b.  The financial report must also include financial and status information for each of the impact fee projects contained in the capital improvements element, by public facility category. 
(2)  Schedule of improvements. In addition to the financial report, the city shall update its five-year schedule of impact fee projects contained in its community work program (CWP) as specified in DCA's Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements, by adding a new fifth year and deleting the year just passed. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-38. - Capital improvements element amendment. 
The city council may determine to amend the capital improvements element from time to time. Amendments to the capital improvements element must comply with the procedural requirements of the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
(1)  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
(2)  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
(3)  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
(4)  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-39. - Continuation of validity. 
Failure of the city council to make any automatic fee schedule adjustments under this chapter, or to make such annual update reports or to amend the capital improvements element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted or adjusted development impact fee schedule; project listings, including estimated costs and impact eligibility percentages; and data upon which the level of service standards and impact fee calculations are based. The failure to periodically adjust, review or amend such impact fee program elements shall not invalidate this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-40. - Administrative guidelines. 
The administrator shall issue guidelines to aid city staff in the administration of this chapter and to facilitate compliance with it by feepayors. The guidelines shall include descriptions of the powers and responsibilities of the administrator. The guidelines shall also include procedures for evaluating and certifying exemptions and credits consistent with the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1, et seq., and undertaking administrative review of impact pursuant to section 107-36. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-41. - Administrative appeals. 
Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the city or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. Such appeals may address: 
(1)  The imposition and/or the amount of an impact fee. 
(2)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of credits applicable to an impact fee. 
(3)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of a refund of an impact fee. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-42. - Administrative appeals process. 
(a)  The administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to a matter addressed in subsection (a) of this section, above. The decision shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. The final decision shall be mailed or electronically transferred to the applicant or feepayor at the address given. 
(b)  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor shall file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
(c)  The appeal shall constitute an application for relief, and be of sufficient content to specify the grounds of the appeal and the relief sought. It shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the appellant; 
(2)  The location of the affected property; and, 
(3)  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator (from which the appeal is taken). 
(d)  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council. 
(e)  The city council shall thereafter establish a date, within 60 days of the appeal, for a hearing on the appeal and give due notice thereof. Any applicant or feepayor taking an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing and to present evidence, and may be represented by counsel. 
(f)  Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the city council shall make a determination on the appeal. 
(1)  A decision shall be made within a reasonable time but in no event more than 60 days from the date of the hearing. 
(2)  An appeal shall be sustained only upon a finding by the city council that the administrator's decision was based on an erroneous finding of material facts or documents. 
(3)  The city council may set the amount of the development impact fee to be paid as a condition of the issuance of the building permit provided all other requirements imposed by all applicable laws are met. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-43. - Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
(a)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
(b)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or seeking a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-44. - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
Any and all other ordinances, resolutions or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. Where this chapter overlaps with other ordinances or regulations adopted by the city council, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-45. - Severability. 
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Sec. 107-46. - Reference to Georgia law. 
It is the intent of the city council that this development impact fee ordinance of Sandy Springs, Georgia, complies with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent with the provisions of said O.C.G.A. ch. 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this chapter is silent as to any provision of said O.C.G.A. ch. 36-71 that is otherwise made mandatory by said O.C.G.A. ch. 36-71, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Attachment A: Impact Fee Schedule 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
NOTES: ITE Code means the land use code assigned in the Trip Generation manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 9th Edition.  Square foot means square foot of gross building floor area.  All figures rounded to nearest whole cent for clarity. Actual fees carried to six decimals or more. 
( Ord. No. 2016-10-33 , § I, 10-18-2016) 
Chapter 117 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Zoning authority, § 1.03(b)(24). 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

Sec. 117-1. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of the city's zoning ordinance or any ordinance amendatory or supplemental thereto. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect as if set out at length in this chapter. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE—ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances found in the Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 