THE ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF COMMERCE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
COMMERCE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Charles L. Hardy, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dusty R. Slater 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Donald Wilson 
Mark Fitzpatrick 
J. Clark Hill, III 
Richard Massey  Archie D. Chaney 
City Council 
____________ 
Clarence H. Bryant 
City Manager 
____________ John E. Stell, Jr.  
City Attorney 
____________ 
Shirley Willis 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
COMMERCE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
J. Clark Hill, III 
Mayor 
____________ 
Keith Burchett 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Darren Owensby 
Mark Fitzpatrick 
Steve Perry 
Johnny Eubanks 
Archie D. Chaney 
City Council 
____________ 
Pete Pyrzenski 
City Manager 
____________ 
John E. Stell, Jr.  
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sandra Haggard 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This volume is a republication of the Commerce Zoning Ordinance of the Commerce, Georgia and was enacted by Ord. No. 95-11, on Nov. 13, 1995, and further updated through Ordinance No. 2007-006, adopted July 9, 2007. 
The Code has been printed as adopted and the original numbering system has been retained. Obvious typographical errors have been corrected without notation; words or phrases added by the editor for purposes of clarification are enclosed in brackets. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1987 Code, the 2001 Zoning Ordinance and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Zoning Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Zoning Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Eric Grant, Supervising Editor, and Kelly B. Cribbs, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Clarence H. Bryant, City Manager, and Mr. John E. Stell, Jr., City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Zoning Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Article 1: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 1.01: - GENERAL 

1.01.001. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance for Commerce, Georgia". 
1.01.002. - Purpose and objectives. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to set forth standards and permissible uses designed to conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of Commerce; health, aesthetics, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to protect natural resources; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to promote desirable living conditions and stability of neighborhoods, to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements by dividing Commerce into districts of such size and shapes as may be best suited to carry out the purposes of the legislative act and of this ordinance. 
1.01.003. - Legislative authority. 
The mayor and council of Commerce, Georgia under the authority of Article IX, Section 2, Paragraph 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. Chapter 66, Title 36, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the city and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and avoid overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other requirements, ordains and enacts into law the Zoning Ordinance for Commerce. 
1.01.004. - Method of regulation. 
The mayor and council of Commerce, Georgia, as authorized by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, adopts zoning regulations for the following purposes: to define certain words used therein; to create zone boundaries; to regulate the location of trades, professions, businesses, and industries; to regulate the density in distribution of population; to provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures; to provide for the method of administration, amendment and enforcement; to provide for the imposition of penalties for violations; repeal conflicting ordinances and resolutions; and for other purposes. 
1.01.005. - Jurisdiction. 
This zoning ordinance shall govern the use of all land and development within the city limits of Commerce, Georgia and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-70-5. 
1.01.006. - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of Commerce, Georgia" dated November 1995 and as may be amended. Said map is hereby made a part of this ordinance and shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. As evidence of its authenticity, the official zoning map shall be signed by the commerce mayor and attested to by the city clerk. 
1.01.007. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
The following rules apply where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts shown on the official zoning map. 
A.  Unless otherwise indicated, the zoning district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, land lot lines, centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads, centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries, and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
B.  Where zoning district boundaries are approximately parallel to or extend to the centerlines of streets, highways, railroads, including their rights-of-way, or the centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, zoning district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, dimensions shall be determined by the scale shown on the official zoning map. 
C.  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot that is under single ownership at the time of enactment of this ordinance, the use classification of a larger portion may be extended by the mayor and council to the remainder without recourse to the amendment procedure. 
D.  Where a public road, street or alley is officially abandoned, the ordinances applicable to the parcel to which it reverts shall apply. 
E.  In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the mayor and council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
CHAPTER 1.02: - WORDS DEFINED 

1.02.001. - Defining words. 
Words used in the zoning ordinance have their normal dictionary meaning unless they are otherwise defined. 
1.02.002. - Use of "shall" and "may". 
A.  Shall means mandatory. The word "shall" means that the directives or requirements are mandatory and may not be waived or modified. If used within the text, "will," and "must," also mean "shall." 
B.  May means permissive. The word "may" means that the directives or requirements are permissive and are imposed at the option of the decision-maker. "Can" and "should" also mean "may." 
1.02.003. - Use of "and" and "or". 
A.  "And" means that each item identified shall be required. 
B.  "Or" means any combination of one or more of the identified items may be required. 
1.02.004. - Definition sources for words not defined within the zoning ordinance. 
A.  Development terms not defined within any chapter of the zoning ordinance shall have the meaning contained within The New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions , by Moskowitz and Lindbloom, published by the Center for Urban Policy Research of Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey. 
B.  Terms not defined in any cited sources shall have the meaning as established in the current edition of the Websters Unabridged Dictionary, published by Merriam-Webster, Inc. 
CHAPTER 1.03: - DEFINITIONS 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have their customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The word "lot" includes "tract," "plot" or "parcel". The word "building" includes "structure". The word "used" or "occupied", as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied". The word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed", "intended", or "arranged to be used". The term "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed", "reconstructed", "altered", "placed", or "moved". The word "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building use" and "use of building". The word "adjacent" means "nearby" and not necessarily "contiguous". The word "map" means the "Official Zoning Map of Commerce, Georgia, November 1995, and as may be amended." 
When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. 
1.03.001.   Accessory building. A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to, and reasonably related to, a main building on the same lot or to the primary use of the property. The accessory building shall be of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building. A "detached" accessory building shall be one that does not have a common wall with the main building on the same lot. 
1.03.002.   Accessory use. A use on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use. 
1.03.003.   Agriculture or agricultural. A parcel used primarily for soil-dependent cultivation of agricultural crop production, the raising of livestock or poultry, pasture, or forestry. 
1.03.004.   Alley. A service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
1.03.005.   Alteration. Any change in the supporting member of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in use of or moving of a building from one location to another, or any increase in the amount or volume of space used for any activity. 
1.03.006.   Animal units. The number of all such animals or fowl allowed on a lot shall be limited to the square footage of the animal or fowl confinement area, less the lot square footage devoted to yard setbacks and the house, divided by the total minimum area required per animal or fowl. Total minimum area required per animal or fowl shall be as follows: horses—43,560 square feet (one acre); cattle—43,560 square feet; sheep or goat—20,000 square feet; fowl—20 per 43,560 square feet; or other livestock (including rattites)—43,560 square feet. (Area requirements are based on minimum acreage averages for grazing such animals in the State of Georgia.) Total minimum area required per animal or fowl shall be a yearly average. Fluctuations in herd or flock size associated with general farming practices shall be permissible under this provision. 
1.03.007.   Apartment. A suite of two or more rooms and a bath which is designed or intended for occupancy by one family or one person doing cooking therein. For zoning purposes, an apartment is regarded as a dwelling unit. A structure containing two apartments is a duplex. A structure containing three or more apartments is a multi-family dwelling. 
1.03.008.   Applicant. Any person who applies for a zoning action and any attorney or other person representing or acting on behalf of a person who applies for a zoning action. 
1.03.009.   Bed and breakfast. A dwelling unit, other than a hotel, motel or boarding house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and meals are provided for compensation to registered guests. 
1.03.010.   Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, but excluding alleys. 
1.03.011.   Board of appeals. The board of appeals for Commerce, Georgia. 
1.03.012.   Boarding house. An establishment with lodging for five or more persons where meals are prepared and served for compensation and where food is placed on the table family-style, without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu. 
1.03.013.1.   Brew pub. Any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. The term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least fifty percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
1.03.013.2.   Brewery. An establishment where malt beverages are manufactured or brewed. 
1.03.013.3   Brewery, micro. Any brewery designed to accommodate the processing of fewer than 5,000 barrels of beer or ale within any consecutive 12-month period. 
1.03.013.4.   Buffer area. A landscaped or naturalized area used to separate and partially obstruct the view of a development from adjacent or contiguous development. 

Figure 1.1 Buffer Area 
1.03.014.   Building. Any structure, either permanent or temporary, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind including tents used for the purposes of a building. 
1.03.015.   Building, height of. The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the average height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the grade. 

Figure 1.2 Building Height
1.03.016.   Building envelope. The area formed by the front, side, and rear building setback lines of a lot within which the principal building must be located. 
1.03.017.   Building official. The individual designated by the mayor and council to serve as building inspector for Commerce. 
1.03.018.   Building line. A line, parallel to the street right-of-way line, the minimum distance which all or any part of the building is set back from the right-of-way line. 

Figure 1.3 Building Line
1.03.019.   Building, principal. A building in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
1.03.020.   Business entity. Any corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, or trust. 
1.03.021.   Campaign contribution. A contribution as defined in paragraph (6) of O.C.G.A. § 21-5-3. 
1.03.022.   City. Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529. 
1.03.023.   City official. The mayor and council of Commerce, Georgia or any member of the planning commission or board of zoning appeals. 
1.03.024.   Clinic. A building where human patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment. 
1.03.025.   Club or lodge. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, or persons for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service that is generally carried on as a business. 
1.03.026.   Commercial use. An occupation, employment, or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee. 
1.03.027.   Community center. A place, structure, area, or other facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community. 
1.03.028.   Comprehensive plan. The "Comprehensive Plan for Jackson County and the cities of Arcade, Braselton, Commerce, Hoschton, Jefferson, Nicholson, Pendergrass, and Talmo, March 1998" as adopted and as may be amended. 
1.03.029.   Conditional use. A use which is not permitted inherently but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to approval by the mayor and council. 
1.03.030.   Conditional use permit. The permit issued by the mayor and council as a precondition to allowing any conditional use in a zoning district. 
1.03.031.   Conservation easement. A nonpossessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purpose of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open space values of real property, assuring its availability for agriculture, forest, recreational, or open space use; protecting natural resources, or maintaining air or water quality. Protection is in perpetuity. 
1.03.032.   Contaminant. Any "regulated substance," as defined by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as in effect on the date of passage of this ordinance and as amended from time to time, and all petroleum products, including gasoline, oil, waste oils, and other fuels as well as their hazardous constituents. 
1.03.033.   Convenience store. A small retail store that is designed and stocked to sell primarily prepackaged food items, but may have beverages, periodicals, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a supermarket). It is designed to attract and depends upon a large volume of stop-and-go traffic. Illustrative examples of convenience stores are those operated by "7-11," "Golden Pantry," and "Kangaroo." Gas pumps are an accessory use to a convenience store. 
1.03.034.   Convenience store/service station/fast food restaurant. A parcel that contains a combination service station, convenience store, and fast food restaurant in one structure located on one parcel. 
1.03.035.   Corridor. All land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
1.03.036.   County. Jackson County, Georgia. 
1.03.037.   Daycare center. A building operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, institution, or group, where children under 18 years of age are received for group care for less than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody. 
1.03.038.   Daycare home. A private dwelling operated by any person who receives pay for supervision and care, fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private dwelling. 
1.03.039.   Development or single development density. Any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. 
1.03.040.   Development density. The number of dwelling units permitted in a development. See Chapter 2.02 to determine development density. 
1.03.041.   Development permit. This shall include building permits, rezoning applications, preliminary and final subdivision plat applications, conditional use permit applications, and variance applications. 
1.03.042.   Diameter breast height (dbh). The diameter of a tree measured four and one-half feet above the ground. Should a tree fork below the four and one-half-foot height, each fork is measured separately and treated as individual trees. Should the tree fork above the four and one-half-foot height, the forks are treated as one tree and measured at four and one-half-foot height. If the tree is situated on a slope, the diameter is measured at a four and one-half-foot height on the uphill side of the tree. 
1.03.043.   Disability glare. The eye's line-of-sight contact with a direct light source, which causes a momentary partial blindness. 
1.03.044.   Dry cleaners. A business that provides laundry cleaning, excluding self service, and contains equipment on the premises necessary for processing laundry. 
1.03.045.   Dwelling, single-family. A structure including site-built, modular, manufactured and mobile homes that contains one dwelling unit designed for residential use that is surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
1.03.046.   Dwelling, two-family (Duplex). A structure containing two dwelling units designed and arranged for residential use by two families living independently of each other. 
1.03.047.   Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
1.03.048.   Easement. A grant of property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, or another person or entity. 
1.03.049.   Family. One or more individuals permanently occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house, group home, or hotel, as defined in this ordinance. 
1.03.050.1.   Farmers market. A retail business, often outdoors and/or within open structures, consisting of individual stalls where farmers and sometimes other vendors sell their produce and other food items directly to the public. 
1.03.050.2.   Fence. An artificially constructed barrier erected to function as an enclosure or for screening. See Chapter 4.27 for specific provisions related to fences and walls. 
1.03.051.   Fence or wall height. The vertical distance between the ground and top of a fence measured from the existing grade. The height shall be measured in a continuum at each point along the fence. 
1.03.052.   Financial interest. All direct ownership interests of the total assets or capital stock of a business entity or ownership interest in a limited liability company where such ownership interest is ten percent or more. 
1.03.053.1.   Flea market/open-air market. A retail business, often outdoors and/or within open structures, consisting of individual stalls selling old or used articles, curios and antiques, miscellaneous merchandise. 
1.03.053.2.   Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of the walls separating two buildings, including stairwells and elevator shafts, but not including: attic space providing headroom for less than six feet six inches, unusable basement or cellar space not used for retailing, uncovered steps or fire escape, open porches, accessory water or cooling towers, accessory off-street parking spaces, or accessory off-street loading berths. 
1.03.054.   Frontage, lot. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect the street right-of-way. All sides of a lot that abut a street shall be considered frontage. On curvilinear streets, the arc between the side lot lines shall be considered the lot frontage. 
1.03.055.   Frontage street. The street coincident to the front boundary line of the parcel. 
1.03.056.   Full cut-off type fixture. A luminary or light fixture that, by design of the housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above a 90 degree, horizontal plane from the base of the fixture. Full cut-off fixtures must be installed in a horizontal position as designed, or the purpose of the design is defeated, and disability glare will result. 
1.03.057.   Garage, private. An accessory building or a portion of a principal building used for parking or storage of automobiles of the principal building's occupants. A carport is considered a private garage. 
1.03.058.   Garage, repair. A building and premises designed or used for the purpose of service or commercial repair of motor vehicles. All body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings. The storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall be solely for the purpose of repairing motor vehicles and not as a salvage or junkyard business. The storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible beyond the premises. 
1.03.059.   Greenspace. Land shown on a development plan, master plan, or official map for conservation, preservation, recreation, landscaping, or park. 
1.03.060.   Gross floor area. The total floor area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage. 
1.03.061.   Health department. Jackson County, Georgia Health Department. 
1.03.062.   Home occupation. An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or accessory building for financial gain, which is clearly subordinate to the principal use of the parcel and which does not change the character thereof. 
1.03.063.   Home office. An office use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit which is carried on solely by the unit's occupant and is incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling. The office may be for the purpose of service or tradeworkers who customarily work at various locations or individuals who work at home. "Home Office" shall not include any business which involves the sale, manufacture or repair of merchandise on the premises. Home Office shall also not include any business requiring access by the public, including, but not limited to, customers, clients or vendors. 
1.03.064.   Horizontal illuminance. The measurement of brightness from a light source, usually measured in footcandles or lumens, which is taken through a light meter's sensor at a horizontal position. 
1.03.065.1.   Hotel/motel. A building with rooms for temporary occupancy by registered guests. 
1.03.065.2.   Industrialized building. A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed for incorporation into a permanent structure at a building site on a permanent foundation to be used for residential purposes. A modular home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the approval of the State Building Administration Board (SBAB) and to meet the same requirements as a site-built home within Commerce. 
1.03.066.  Reserved. 
1.03.067.   Junk. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, or waste, junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, and old scrap ferrous or nonferrous metal. 
1.03.068.   Junked vehicle. Any wrecked, dismantled, non-operating motorized vehicle or vehicle which does not bear a current license plate which is not located in a garage or carport or is visible from the right-of-way or from adjacent properties. 
1.03.069.   Kennel. Any location where, for commercial purposes, four or more adult dogs, cats, rabbits or other domestic animals are kept for the purpose of boarding, caring for, raising, grooming, breeding, training or sale. 
1.03.070.   Kindergarten. A school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from four through six years which provides preparation for elementary school. 
1.03.071.   Laundromat. A business that provides home-type washing, drying, ironing machines or coin operated dry cleaning machines for hire and use by customers on the premises. 
1.03.072.   Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up. A business that provides only for the convenience of taking and picking up laundry and which does not have any on-site equipment for processing laundry. 
1.03.073.   Light trespass. Light from an artificial light source that is intruding into an area where it is not wanted or does not belong. 
1.03.074.   Loading space. A space within the principal use or on the same lot that provides for standing or loading and/or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
1.03.075.   Lot. A portion of, or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description, metes and bounds, intended for transfer of ownership or for building development and having a separate tax parcel reference. 

Figure 4.2 Types of Lots
1.03.076.   Lot, corner. A lot abutting 2 or more public streets or city maintained roads at their intersection. 
1.03.077.   Lot, double frontage or through lot. A lot with frontage on two public streets and/or city maintained roads that does not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
1.03.078.   Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
1.03.079.   Lot line, rear. The rear lot line is generally opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, and lying wholly within the lot and farthest from the front lot line. 
1.03.080.   Lot of record. A lot whose existence, location, and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Jackson County, Georgia. 
1.03.081.   Lot width. The horizontal distance between one side lot line and the other side lot line measured at the minimum front setback line. 
1.03.082.   Manufactured home, Class A. A dwelling unit, meeting the definition of "manufactured home" contained in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq., and meeting the following development standards: 
A.  The unit shall have a minimum width of at least 28 feet. 
B.  The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built-up gravel materials, standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the Building Official. The roof overhang must be at least one foot when measured from the vertical side. 
C.  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, hardboard, stucco, masonite, vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site-built dwellings. 
D.  The unit shall be attached to a permanent foundation that meets all building code requirements. 
E.  A landing must be installed at each outside doorway. The minimum size of the landing shall be at least four feet by six feet (excluding steps) at each doorway. The structure must include steps which lead to ground level, and both landing and steps must meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
1.03.083.   Manufactured home, Class B. A dwelling unit, meeting the definition of "manufactured home" contained in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it as constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq., but which does not meet the criteria of a Class A manufactured home. The dwelling must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
1.03.084.   Mayor and council. Mayor and Council of the City of Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529. 
1.03.085.   Member of the family. The spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of a Commerce official. This definition applies to Chapter 5.09 only. 
1.03.086.   Mini-warehouse. A building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractor's supplies. 
1.03.087.1.   Mobile food unit. A motor vehicle used for the preparation and/or serving of food and food products direct to consumers. 
1.03.087.2.   Mobile home. A transportable, factory-built structure designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. 
1.03.088.   Modular home. See "Industrialized Building." 
1.03.089.1.   Motor vehicle repair shop. A business including, but not limited to, top and body, paint shop, automotive glass, transmission, and tire repair shops, car washes, including automated and staffed facilities, and oil change and lubrication facilities. 
1.03.089.2.   Non-conforming building or structure. Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform to these ordinances governing the type, bulk, location, height or size of buildings or structures permitted in the district prior to the adoption of this ordinance but which is in full compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and ordinances, and for which all required federal, state and local permits have been issued. 
1.03.090.   Non-conforming lot. A lot, the area, width, or other characteristics of which fails to comply with applicable ordinances and which was of-record and in full compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and ordinances prior to the enactment of this or other ordinances or other predecessor ordinance, but which does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
1.03.091.   Non-conforming use. A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use ordinance for its zoning district but which complied with applicable ordinances at the time the use was established. 
1.03.092.   Nursing home. A facility for three or more unrelated ill or aged persons not operating as the functional equivalent of a family, that provides food, shelter, and medical care for compensation in addition to meeting the physical, emotional, and social needs of its patients. 
1.03.093.   Off-street parking. An area exclusive of a public or private thoroughfare where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of temporary, daily, or overnight parking. 
1.03.094   Open space. Land used for recreation, resource protection, amenity, or buffers. In no event must any area of a lot constituting the minimum lot area nor any part of an existing or future road, right-of-way, off-street parking, loading space, or area immediately underneath electrical transmission lines be counted as open space. 
1.03.095.   Opponent. Any person who opposes a rezoning action or any attorney or other person representing or acting on behalf of a person who opposes a rezoning action. 
1.03.096.   Oppose. To appear before, discuss with, or contact, either orally or in writing, a Commerce official and argue against a zoning action. 
1.03.097.   Overlay district. A district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land-use category. 
1.03.098.   Permitted use. Any use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
1.03.099.   Person. An individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, committee, association, corporation, labor organization, or any other organization or group of persons. 
1.03.100.   Personal care home. Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related by blood or marriage to the owner or administrator of the home. Personal services includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. 
1.03.101.   Planning commission. The City of Commerce Planning Commission. 
1.03.102.   Plat. A sketch, map or survey of a lot, tract or parcel of land including lot lines, courses and distances, street rights-of-way and easements, with the dimensions of these features inscribed thereon, suitable for recording with the Jackson County Superior Court. 
1.03.103.   Playschool. A school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from three to four years of age which operates for less than four hours per day. 
1.03.104.   Principal use. The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
1.03.105.   Professional. When used in connection with "use" and "occupancy", a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including but not limited to accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stock brokers and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the building nor any use which would create any loud noise or noxious odors within Commerce. 
1.03.106.   Property interest. The direct ownership of real property, including any percentage of ownership less than total ownership. 
1.03.107.   Public utility. An above-ground structure or facility (other than buildings, unless such buildings are used as storage incidental to the operation of such structure or facility) used in connection with the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals. Excepted from this definition are electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, gas, water, and sewer lines, wires or pipes, together with supporting poles or structures located within a public right-of-way. 
1.03.108.   Real property. Any tract or parcel of land and, if developed, any buildings or structures located on the land. 
1.03.109.   Recreation facility, commercial. A recreation facility operated as a business and open to the public for a fee. 
1.03.110.   Recreation facility, private. A recreation facility operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bonafide members and guests of such nonprofit organization. 
1.03.111.   Recreational vehicle. A vehicle primarily designed for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use which has its own motor power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. The basic types are: travel trailer, folding camping trailer, park trailer, truck camper, motor home, and custom van conversions. 
1.03.112.1. Recycling station. Recycling station means an unattended facility located throughout the community to accept donation or delivery of recyclable goods, including glass, cardboard, newspaper, paper, plastic and similar materials. (Ord. No. 2008-14, (012), 7-21-08) 
1.03.112.2. Recycling center. Recycling center means an enclosed and roofed facility that accepts recycled materials and processes or treats such materials, such as glass, cardboard, newspaper, paper, plastic and similar materials, and returns them into a condition where they may be used again for production of other goods. All collection and processing shall take place inside the facility and shall not be stored outside the facility. (Ord. No. 2008-14, (113), 7-21-08) 
1.03.112.   Religious institution. A building, together with accessory buildings and use, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes. Includes churches, chapels, cathedrals, temples, and similar designations. 
1.03.113.   Restaurant. An establishment where food and beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, generally in an enclosed building. A snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground, or park operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility is not a restaurant. 
1.03.114.   Retail sales, general merchandise. Establishments which are retail operations that carry an assortment of merchandise from many retail categories. Such establishments may include, but are not limited to, department stores, discount stores, farm stores, and similar establishments. 
1.03.115.   Retail sales, household. Establishments which are retail operations that sell goods for furnishing or improving housing units. These establishments may include, but are not limited to, furniture stores, home improvement centers, electronic stores, appliance stores, and similar establishments. 
1.03.116.   Retail sales, specialty. Retail operations that specialize in one type or line of merchandise. Such stores may include, but are not limited to, apparel stores, jewelry stores, bookstores, shoe stores, stationary stores, antique stores, and similar establishments. 
1.03.117.   Retail services establishments. Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public for personal or household use, including hotels and motels, finance, real estate, insurance, personal service, amusement and recreation services, museums, galleries, and health, educational, and social services. 
1.03.118.   Right-of-way. That area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple by Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529 or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
1.03.119.   Right-of-way line. The outside boundary of a right-of-way, whether such right-of-way is established by usage, recorded easement, deed, dedication or by an official right-of-way map of Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia, 30529. 
1.03.120.   School. A public or private facility that provides a curriculum of elementary, middle, and/or secondary academic instruction. 
1.03.121.   Screening. A method where a view of one site is shielded, concealed, or hidden from another site. Screening techniques include fences, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other features. Screening must provide a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that it provides year-round maximum shielding, concealment or hiding from the ground to a height of at least eight feet or from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. 
1.03.122.   Self-storage facility. See "mini-warehouses." 
1.03.123.   Service station. Any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories and/or incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand or automatic washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, excluding painting or major repairs. 
1.03.124.   Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the lot or property right-of-way line and the nearest front, side or rear line of the building, including terraces or any covered projections excluding steps. 
1.03.125.   Shopping center. A group of retail business and service uses on a single site planned and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking facilities. 
1.03.126.   Sign. A structure or device designed or intended to convey information to the public in written or pictorial form. 
1.03.127.   Sign area. The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing the extreme limits of sign display, including any frame or border. Curved, spherical, or any other shaped sign face shall be computed on the basis of actual surface area. The copy of signs composed of individual letters, numerals, or other devices shall be the sum of the area of the smallest rectangle or other geometric figure encompassing all of said letters or devices. The calculation for a double-faced sign shall be the area of one face only. Double-faced signs shall be constructed so that the perimeter of both faces coincide and are parallel and not more than 24 inches apart. 
1.03.128.   Sign face. The area or display surface used for the message. 
1.03.129.   Sign height. The vertical measurement from the highest part of a sign, including all support structures, to the ground level. Any earth berm or elevated foundation that supports a sign, sign post, or sign support is included in the height of the sign. 
1.03.130.   Sign structure. Construction used or designed to support a sign. 
1.03.131.   Site-built. A building constructed on-site with approved building materials, inspected periodically during construction, and constructed according to locally adopted building codes. 
1.03.132.   Site-built home. A dwelling unit constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and constructed in accordance with the Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCII). A site-built home must meet the following development standards: 
A.  The unit shall have a minimum width in excess of 28 feet. 
B.  The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the mayor and council. The roof overhang must be at least one square foot when measured from the vertical side. 
C.  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, hardboard, stucco, masonite, or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. 
D.  The unit shall be attached to a permanent foundation that meets all building code requirements. 
E.  A landing must be installed at each outside doorway. The minimum size of the landing shall be at least four feet by six feet (excluding steps) at each doorway. The structure must include steps which lead to ground level, and both landing and steps must meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
1.03.133.   Sketch. A rough drawing that identifies the layout of the development on the parcel. 
1.03.134.   Solid fence. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials generally manufactured for fencing, erected to enclose or screen areas of land in a manner where the area inside the fencing is not readily visible at any distance. 
1.03.135.   Solid wall. A wall constructed in such a manner to prohibit viewing of land, materials, buildings, etc., located behind the wall, by an individual standing outside and parallel to the wall. 
1.03.136.   Special events. Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, or other types of special events that (1) run for longer than one day but not longer than two weeks, (2) are intended to or likely to attract substantial crowds, and (3) are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property where the special event is to be located. 
1.03.137.   Storage trailer A trailer commonly attached to a cab or chassis for transportation (ex: trailer attached to 18-wheel cab for transporting goods). 
1.03.138.   Story. That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it. 
1.03.139.   Street. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of ingress and egress to abutting property. See Chapter 4.05 for street classifications. 
1.03.140.   Street, public. A street that is titled by description or deed and vested in the City of Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529. 
1.03.141.   Street line. The legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property. 
1.03.142.   Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to the following: site-built buildings, manufactured, mobile and modular homes, swimming pools, and signs. 
1.03.143.   Subdivision. The division of a tract, lot or parcel into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the immediate or future purpose of sale, lease, offer or development. Also see Commerce Subdivision Regulations. 
1.03.144.   Subdivision regulations. Commerce Subdivision Regulations dated November, 1995 and as may be amended. 
1.03.145.1.   Temporary outdoor event. A temporary outdoor event is any event conducted in the open air or within a tent or other temporary structure produced for a limited time, and includes the following: 
A.  A festival, carnival or exhibition where: (i) Unpackaged food is served, sold or transferred to members of the public, or (ii) Motorized amusement devices, a tent or an outdoor stage is used; or 
B.  Any temporary commercial event conducted on residential property, other than a yard sale; or 
C.  Any temporary event conducted on residential property where more than 200 guests or attendees are expected on any one day; or 
D.  Any outdoor sales or commercial activity by a peddler or transient merchant on non-residential property, other than a licensed flea market. 
Provided, however, that "temporary outdoor event" excludes the following: 
A.  Any event conducted on property owned by any government entity if authorized by the property owner; and 
B.  Any event conducted on the grounds of any developed lot whose principle use is one of public assembly, such as a church, school, library, park or membership organization. 
1.03.145.2.   Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which is part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light, and ventilation. 
1.03.146.   Tower. Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, amateur radio licensees tower, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
1.03.147.   Uplighting. Any light source that distributes illumination above a horizontal plane. 
1.03.148.   Upper floor residential apartment. A studio, one-bedroom, or two-bedroom dwelling unit located on any floor other than the basement, ground, or street level floor. 
1.03.149.   Variance, area. A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading ordinances as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, not due to the fault of the owner of said property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
1.03.150.   Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
1.03.151.   Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal use, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line and the building line projected to the side lines of the lot. On corner lots, the front yard is considered parallel to the street upon which the lot has its largest dimension. 
1.03.152.   Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building. 
1.03.153.   Yard, side. A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines. Side yard width shall be measured at right angles to side lines of the lot. 

Figure 4.4 Yards and Setbacks
1.03.154.   Zoning action. An action by the Mayor and Council adopting an amendment to the zoning ordinance and map that has the effect of zoning real property from one zoning classification to another. 
1.03.155.   Zoning administrator. The individual or his/her designated representative, who is vested with the duty of administrating land use regulations within the areas of the City of Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529. 
1.03.156.   Zoning district. A section of the City of Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529 where the zoning ordinance is uniform. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 1.04: - APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE 

1.04.001. - Use. 
No building, structure, premises, or land shall be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, extended, enlarged, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with this ordinance. 
1.04.002. - Building height. 
No building or structure shall be erected, constructed or altered that exceeds the height limit for the zoning district in which it is located. 
1.04.003. - Lot area and lot size. 
Unless acquired for public use, no lot shall be reduced in size so that it does not comply with the applicable provision of this ordinance. 
1.04.004. - Yards. 
No part of a yard or other open space required for one building shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues, and eaves, provided such projections do not extend more than two feet into the yard area requirements. 
1.04.005. - Corner lots. 
Minimum side yard requirements for corner lots shall not be less than the minimum front yard requirements for such lots. 
1.04.006. - Principal buildings. 
In the C-1, C-H, CBD, M-1, and M-2, more than one principal building containing a permitted or conditional use may be erected on a single lot or tract of land provided that all yard and other space requirements of this ordinance are met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. 
The owner must record a plat of subdivision of the lot(s) with the clerk of the superior court of Jackson County before a building permit can be issued where a parcel of land is under single ownership and two or more principal buildings are located on the parcel. 
1.04.007. - Minimum distance between buildings. 
The following minimum distances between buildings are required unless otherwise specified within this ordinance. 
A.  The minimum distance between principal uses located on the same lot or parcel: 
1.  Front to front arrangement ..... 40 ft. 
2.  Front to rear arrangement ..... 50 ft. 
3.  Rear to rear arrangement ..... 30 ft. 
4.  Side to side arrangement ..... 20 ft. 
5.  All other combinations ..... 20 ft. 
B.  There shall be a distance of not less than 20 feet between a principal and accessory building located on the same lot or parcel. 
C.  No accessory building shall be located closer than 20 feet to any lot line in any zoning district. 
1.04.008. - Temporary buildings. 
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any non-residential zoning district and shall be removed within 30 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
1.04.009. - Building envelope. 
The building envelope shall not exceed 15 feet beyond the building footprint with the exception of one, 15-foot wide construction entrance to the site and the location of underground utilities. Building envelope lines should not be drawn into wetlands, floodplains, or steep slopes (slopes in excess of 25 percent) and shall not include the tops of ridge lines. In residential development, the minimum tree density outside the building envelope shall comply with section 12.4 of the City of Commerce Subdivision Regulations. Trees outside the building envelope shall be protected. In commercial and industrial development, the building envelope shall not exceed 15 feet beyond the building footprint and parking and loading area. Areas beyond building envelopes should be restricted from development. Commercial and industrial uses shall meet the buffer requirements of Chapter 4.07. 
Existing features that would add value to property or to the local government as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and falls, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved. No trees shall be removed from any property nor any change of grade of the land effected until a building permit has been granted. All trees on the sketch plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees, where required, shall be welled and protected against change of grade. The sketch plat shall show the location of existing trees as required by these regulations and shall further indicate all those marked for retention. 
A.  Protection of root system and tree protection zones. The root system of trees can easily extend two to three times beyond the dripline of the tree canopy. The root system within the dripline region is generally considered to be the critical root zone. Disturbance within this zone can directly affect a tree's chances for survival. To protect these critical root zones the following standards shall apply: 
1.  The use of tree save islands and stands are encouraged rather than the protection on individual (non-specimen) trees scattered throughout a site. This will facilitate overall site organization as related to tree protection. 
2.  The protection zone of specimen trees or stands of trees or otherwise designated tree save areas shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy. A specimen tree is defined as: 
Any tree in fair or better condition which equals or exceeds the following diameter sizes: 
a.  Large hardwoods, i.e. oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, etc.: 30 inches DBH (diameter at breast height). 
b.  Large softwoods, e.g. pines, evergreens, etc.: 30 inches DBH. 
c.  Small trees, e.g. dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc.: Ten inches DBH. 
Any tree in fair or better condition should meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  A life expectancy of greater than 15 years. 
b.  A relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow, and less than 20 percent radial trunk dieback. 
c.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
3.  Layout of the project site utility and grading plans should accommodate the required tree protection zones. Utilities must be placed outside tree protection zones. 
4.  Construction site activities such as parking, material storage, concrete washouts, burn pit placement, vehicle and equipment maintenance shall be located outside tree protection zones and arranged so as to prevent disturbances within tree protection zones. 
5.  No disturbance shall occur within the protection zone of specimen trees or stands of trees without prior approval of the zoning administrator. 
6.  To avoid soil compaction, vehicular traffic should not be permitted in the root or tree protection zone. If vehicular traffic must occur in the root zone, minimize soils compaction by applying a four to 12-inch layer of coarse mulch in the traffic area. 
7.  Active tree protection tree fencing shall be installed along the outer edge of and completely surrounding the critical root zones of all specimen trees or stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protection zones, prior to any land disturbance. 
8.  These fences will be a minimum of four feet high constructed in post and rail configuration. A two-inch by four-inch post and a double one-inch by four-inch rail is recommended. Four-foot orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing is also acceptable. This fencing shall remain in place until the final inspection is issued on said project by the building official. 
9.  Passive forms of tree protection may be utilized to designate tree save areas which are remote from areas of land disturbance. These areas must be surrounded with continuous rope or flagging (heavy mil minimum four-inch wide). All passive tree protection must be accompanied by "keep out" signage. 
10.  All specimen trees or stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protection zones must be protected from the construction processes that cause sedimentation, erosion, flooding, and other conditions resulting in tree damage. 
a.  Silt screening must be placed along the outer uphill edge of tree protection zones at the land disturbance interface. 
b.  Silt screening should be backed by 12 gauge, two inches by four-inch wire mesh fencing in areas of steep slope (a grade of 2:1 or greater). 
c.  All erosion control must comply with the Commerce Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
11.  All tree fencing and erosion control barriers must be installed prior to any land disturbance and maintained throughout the land disturbance process and the building construction. The fencing shall not be removed until landscaping is installed. 
1.04.010. - Annexation. 
Once an annexation is effective, which occurs on the first day of the month following the month in which the annexation occurred, the property transfers from the jurisdiction of the county, losing whatever zoning the county provided, and becomes unzoned. The City of Commerce, Jackson County, GA 30529 must zone the property in accordance with applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-6-1 et seq. 
To prohibit a landowner from stepping in and applying for a building permit based on no zoning and creating a vested rights issue during the period that the property has no zoning, building permits, land disturbance permits or certificates of zoning compliance shall not be issued until the property is finally zoned by the mayor and council of the City of Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529. 
Article 2: - BASE USE REGULATIONS AND DISTRICTS 
CHAPTER 2.01: - DIVISION OF CITY INTO DISTRICTS 

2.01.001. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, Commerce, Georgia is divided into zoning districts as follows: 
Agricultural District 
AF  Agricultural Farm District 
AR  Agricultural-Residential District 
Residential Districts 
R1E Single-family Estate Residential District (very low density) 
R1  Single-family Residential District (low density) 
R2  Single-family Residential District (medium density) 
R3  Two-family Residential District 
R4  Multi-family Residential District 
R5  Single-family Residential District (manufactured home parks/subdivisions) 
Commercial Districts 
C-1  Neighborhood Commercial 
C-2  General Commercial District 
CBD Central Business District 
OCR Office Commercial Residential District 
Industrial Districts 
M-1  Light industrial District 
M-2  Heavy Manufacturing District 
Overlay Districts 
OSD Open Space Design District 
(Ord. No. 2006-020, 9-11-06) 
CHAPTER 2.02: - DEVELOPMENT DENSITY 
Only acreage devoted to usable land may be used to determine the development density or number of dwelling units permitted. Usable land is determined by subtracting all land with poorly drained or very poorly drained soils, as defined by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, land with slopes in excess of 25 percent, bodies of water, and land within the 100-year floodplain as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), from the total tract area. If the tract lies in more than one zoning district, "Lot Size" shall be computed based on a weighted average minimum lot size, considering the proportion of land. 
For instance if the parcel contains 100 acres but only 80 acres are determined to be usable land, then in the R1 district where the minimum lot size is 32,670 square feet, the number of dwelling units permitted is 106. In actuality the number will be less once you provide for roads, easements, and any amenities. 
CHAPTER 2.03: - AREA, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

2.03.001. - Area, yard, and height requirements. 
This section is established to show the minimum size, width, and maximum height requirements for the land uses within each designated zoning district. Lot size shall be based on factors including the size of the building required for that use, required parking, and ground water flow. The zoning administrator is authorized to increase minimum lot sizes and otherwise vary zoning district development standards to accommodate the need to use septic tanks and/or wells and health department regulations in this regard. The unavailability of public sewer and/or water shall preclude the ability to develop projects which cannot utilize septic tanks. 
2.03.002. - Minimum lot size, set backs, height. 

 
* Maximum four units per acre 
CHAPTER 2.04: - PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES 

2.04.001. - Permitted and conditional uses. 
The uses listed in the table below shall be permitted in Commerce, unless otherwise allowed*, and no structure shall erected, structurally altered or enlarged unless the use is all as: 
A.  A permitted use (P); 
B.  A conditional use (C) subject to the application procedures specified in [chapter] 5.02; 
C.  An accessory use as specified in [chapter] 4.11; or 
D.  Uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
* As in conditional uses and variances. 

 
1 See section 2.07.003 for residential permitted uses and restrictions in the CBD. 
2 Allowed if the acreage of the property was compliant with four acres for one horse and an additional two acres per animal for additional horses. The stable could not exceed four stalls. 
(Mo. of 2-14-05; Ord. No. 2005-005A, § 1, 4-11-05; Mo. of 8-8-05; Ord. No. 2006-020, 9-11-06; Ord. No. 2015-007, 4-20-15; Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 2.05: - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS 

2.05.001. - AF - Agricultural Farm District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. This zoning district is comprised chiefly of open land. The regulations for this district are designed to allow for some development while primarily maintaining farming characteristics. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the AF Agricultural Farm District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the AF Agricultural Farm District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the AF Agricultural Farm District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
E.  Prohibited uses: Designated uses not allowed. Bulk storage containers, not to exceed 10,000 gallons for petroleum, natural gas or other flammable gasses or liquids, other than as an accessory use to a gasoline station or truck stop, leather and hide tanning and finishing, except taxidermy, mobile home (pre 1976), manufacturing other than finished stationary products, petroleum and coal products manufacturing other than asphalt plants and solid waste combustors or incinerators. 
F.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous products. A manufacturing or industrial activity that produces any of the following as products or by-products of the manufacturing process is prohibited: Caustic or corrosive acids, chlorine or other noxious gasses, explosives, fertilizer or glue, products involving hair or fur. 
G.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous processes. A manufacturing or industrial use that involves any of the following is prohibited; tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy, petroleum refining, processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast, rendering or refining of fats and oils and wood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-005B, § 1, 4-11-2005) 
2.05.002. - AR - Agricultural Residential District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. This zoning district is comprised of areas where limited agricultural endeavors can operate compatibly with a greater density of population than typically found in the AF District. The intent of the regulations is to support low intensity farming (hobby farming) and the maintenance of the general rural character of openness yet accommodating limited, large lot residential development. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the AR Agricultural Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
For new construction only, all four sides of the structure must be composed of the allowable building materials below. 
1.  Allowed building materials. 
a)  Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
b)  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
c)  Cement-based artificial wood siding is allowed for up to ten percent of surface area. 
2.  Prohibited building materials. 
a)  Vinyl siding; 
b)  Exposed concrete block; 
c)  Natural wood. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, vinyl, aluminum, or wood may be used for fascia boards and soffits. 
The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the mayor and council. The roof overhang must be at least one square foot when measured from the vertical side. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the AR Agricultural Residential District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the AR Agricultural Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-009, 11-16-15) 
2.05.003. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 2.06: - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

2.06.001. - R1E - Single-Family Estate Residential (Very Low Density). 
A.  Purpose and intent. The R1E Single-Family Estate Residential is composed of low density, single-family residential development land. The district is designed to encourage single-family development in a rural setting and certain uses allied to or customarily incidental to residential developments in a rural area. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the R1E Single-Family Estate Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
For new construction only, all four sides of the structure must be composed of the allowable building materials below. 
1.  Allowed building materials. 
a)  Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
b)  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
c)  Stucco is allowed. The use of Exterior Insulating and Finish Systems (EIFS) is also permitted. 
d)  Cement-based artificial wood siding is allowed. 
The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the mayor and council. The roof overhang must be at least one square foot when measured from the vertical side. 
2.  Prohibited building materials. 
a)  Vinyl siding; 
b)  Exposed concrete block; 
c)  Natural wood. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, vinyl, aluminum, or wood may be used for fascia boards and soffits. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the R1E Single-Family Estate Residential District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
(1)  Horse and riding stables, private. A building for the shelter and feeding of horses shall be permitted in the R1E District as an accessory use subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Personal horses stable. 
1.  A personal horse stable shall not contain more than four stalls. 
2.  Such stables shall be established on a lot having an area of not less than four acres for one horse and an additional two full acres for each additional horse kept on the property. 
3.  The horse stable and any corral or designated riding area shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line. 
4.  All animals shall be maintained in a fully fenced area. 
b.  Private riding stable. 
1.  Horse stables with five or more stalls are deemed private riding stables and are only allowed within an equestrian oriented subdivision for the common use of all residents in the subdivision. 
2.  Private riding stables must meet the lot size requirements of personal horse stables. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the R1E Single-Family Estate Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
E.  Prohibited uses: Designated uses not allowed. Bulk storage containers, not to exceed 10,000 gallons for petroleum, natural gas or other flammable gasses or liquids, other than as an accessory use to a gasoline station or truck stop, leather and hide tanning and finishing, except taxidermy, mobile home (pre 1976), manufacturing other than finished stationary products, petroleum and coal products manufacturing other than asphalt plants and solid waste combustors or incinerators. 
F.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous products. A manufacturing or industrial activity that produces any of the following as products or by-products of the manufacturing process is prohibited: Caustic or corrosive acids, chlorine or other noxious gasses, explosives, fertilizer or glue products involving hair or fur. 
G.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous processes. A manufacturing or industrial use that involves any of the following is prohibited; tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy, petroleum refining, processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast, rendering or refining of fats and oils and wood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-001B, § I, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 2005-005B, § 1, 4-11-2005; Ord. No. 2015-009, 11-16-15) 
2.06.002. - R1 - Single-Family Residential (Low Density). 
A.  Purpose and intent. The R1 Single-Family Residential District is composed of low density single-family residential development land. The district is designed to encourage single-family development in a rural setting and certain uses allied to or customarily incidental to residential developments in a rural area. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the R1 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
For new construction only, all four sides of the structure must be composed of the allowable building materials below. 
1.  Allowed building materials. 
a)  Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
b)  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone. and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
c)  Stucco is allowed. The use of Exterior Insulating and Finish Systems (EIFS) is also permitted. 
d)  Cement-based artificial wood siding. 
2.  Prohibited building materials. 
a)  Vinyl siding; 
b)  Exposed concrete block; 
c)  Natural wood. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, vinyl, aluminum, or wood may be used for fascia boards and soffits. 
The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the mayor and council. The roof overhang must be at least one square foot when measured from the vertical side. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the R1 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
(1)  Horse and riding stables, private. Personal horse stables and private riding stables shall be permitted in the R1 District as an accessory use subject to provisions of subsection 2.06.001(C)(1). 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the R1 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-001B, § II, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 2015-009, 11-16-15) 
2.06.003. - R2 - Single-Family Residential District (Medium Density). 
A.  Purpose and intent. The R2 Single-Family Residential District is mainly comprised of medium to high density single-family subdivision development, where surrounding land uses are compatible with medium to high density development and such development would not have an adverse impact on the surrounding areas. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the R2 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
For new construction only, all four sides of the structure must be composed of the allowable building materials below. 
1.  Allowed building materials. 
a)  Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
b)  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
c)  Stucco is allowed. The use of Exterior Insulating and Finish Systems (EIFS) is also permitted. 
d)  Cement-based artificial wood siding. 
2.  Prohibited building materials. 
a)  Vinyl siding; 
b)  Exposed concrete block; 
c)  Natural wood. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Vinyl, Aluminum, or Wood may be used for fascia boards and soffits. 
The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the mayor and council. The roof overhang must be at least one square foot when measured from the vertical side. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the R2 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
(1)  Horse and riding stables, private. Personal horse stables and private riding stables shall be permitted in the R2 district as an accessory use subject to provisions of subsection 2.06.001C(1). 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the R2 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-001B, § III, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 2015-009, 11-16-15) 
2.06.004. - R3 - Two-Family Residential District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The R3 Two-Family Residential District is mainly comprised of medium to high density, single-family or two-family housing where surrounding land uses are compatible with medium to high density residential development or suitable transitions are provided. Appropriate areas should have adequate public facilities including community or public water and/or sewer systems. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the R3 Two-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
For new construction only, at least three sides of the single-family residential structure must adhere to the allowed building materials list below, the remaining side must be hardi-plank or combination of the allowable building materials below. Two-family structures shall be four sided brick: 
1.  Allowed building materials. 
a)  Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
b)  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
c)  Stucco is allowed. The use of Exterior Insulating and Finish Systems (EIFS) is also permitted. 
d)  Cement-based artificial wood siding is allowed for up to ten percent of surface area. 
2.  Prohibited building materials. 
a)  Vinyl siding; 
b)  Exposed concrete block; 
c)  Natural wood. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, vinyl, aluminum, or wood may be used for fascia boards and soffits. 
The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the mayor and council. The roof overhang must be at least one square foot when measured from the vertical side. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the R3 Two-Family Residential District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
(1)  Horse and riding stables, private. Personal horse stables and private riding stables shall be permitted in the R3 district as an accessory use subject to provisions of subsection 2.06.001C(1). 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the R3 Two-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-001B, § IV, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 2015-009, 11-16-15) 
2.06.005. - R4 - Multi-Family Residential. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The R4 Multi-Family Residential District is chiefly composed of high density multi-family development. These areas of higher density development should, where possible, be located on community or public water and/or sewer systems and should be designed so as to ensure harmony within these areas. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the R4 Multi-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
For new construction only, all four sides of residential structure must adhere to the allowed building materials list below: 
1.  Allowed building materials. 
a)  Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
b)  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
c)  Cement-based artificial wood siding is allowed for up to ten percent of surface area. 
2.  Prohibited building materials. 
a)  Vinyl siding; 
b)  Exposed concrete block; 
c)  Natural wood. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, vinyl, aluminum, or wood may be used for fascia boards and soffits. 
The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the mayor and council. The roof overhang must be at least one square foot when measured from the vertical side. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the R4 Multi-Family Residential District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
(1)  Horse and riding stables, private. Personal horse stables and private riding stables shall be permitted in the R4 district as an accessory use subject to provisions of subsection 2.06.001C(1). 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the R4 Multi-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-001B, § V, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 2015-009, 11-16-15) 
2.06.006. - R-5 - Single-Family Residential District for Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The R-5 Single-Family Residential District is composed primarily of high density residential development of multi-family dwellings. Developments in this district should be located on public water and sewer facilities, but exemptions may be made for developments using private community facilities where approved by the health department. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the R-5 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
For new construction only, all four sides of residential structure must adhere to the allowed building materials list below: 
1.  Allowed building materials. 
a)  Brick, except that brick veneers that are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not acceptable; 
b)  Stone. Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and acid marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed; 
c)  Cement-based artificial wood siding is allowed for up to ten percent of surface area. 
2.  Prohibited building materials. 
a)  Vinyl siding; 
b)  Exposed concrete block; 
c)  Natural wood. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, vinyl, aluminum, or wood may be used for fascia boards and soffits. 
The roof shall have a minimum 5:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel) or other materials approved by the mayor and council. The roof overhang must be at least one square foot when measured from the vertical side. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the R-5 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
(1)  Horse and riding stables, private. Personal horse stables and private riding stables shall be permitted in the R5 district as an accessory use subject to provisions of subsection 2.06.001C(1). 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the R-5 Single-Family Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-001B, § VI, 1-10-2005; Ord. No. 2015-009, 11-16-15) 
CHAPTER 2.07: - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

2.07.001. - C-1 - Neighborhood Commercial. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District is primarily composed of service businesses or light retail establishments generally designed to serve nearby residential areas. It is the intent of this district to provide convenient commercial establishments that are primarily used by persons residing in the area. All businesses shall be those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, noise, vibration, or traffic congestion, and should, when possible, be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
The site plan for such use must provide for adequate ingress and egress of vehicular traffic and shall not cause safety, health or traffic problems in the area. 
The proposal is justified based on facts presented to indicate the need for such use, as called for in the Commerce Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
E.  Prohibited uses: Designated uses not allowed. Bulk storage containers, not to exceed 10,000 gallons for petroleum, natural gas or other flammable gasses or liquids, other than as an accessory use to a gasoline station or truck stop, leather and hide tanning and finishing, except taxidermy, mobile home (pre 1976), manufacturing other than finished stationary products, petroleum and coal products manufacturing other than asphalt plants and solid waste combustors or incinerators. 
F.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous products. A manufacturing or industrial activity that produces any of the following as products or by-products of the manufacturing process is prohibited: Caustic or corrosive acids, chlorine or other noxious gasses, explosives, fertilizer or glue, products involving hair or fur. 
G.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous processes. A manufacturing or industrial use that involves any of the following is prohibited; tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy, petroleum refining, processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast, rendering or refining of fats and oils and wood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-005B, § 1, 4-11-2005) 
2.07.002. - C-2 - General Commercial District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The C-2 General Commercial District is primarily composed of heavy commercial uses usually located near population centers and which may generate increased traffic and congestion. The intent of this district is to provide for special areas which, due to their location or current land use, have been set aside to allow uses which may not be allowed in the lighter commercial districts, but are not generally objectionable by reasons of dust. odor, bright lights, noise or vibration. This district should generally be utilized as a buffer between light industrial and lighter commercial zones, and uses within this district should, when possible, be carried on within a completely enclosed building. Individual development of such uses should be allowed subject to the following conditions: 
Such proposed use is not inconsistent with neighboring zoning and current land use, and will, when necessary, provide adequate buffer between adjoining light industrial and lighter commercial, residential or agricultural districts; 
The site plan for the proposed use provides for adequate ingress and egress of vehicular traffic and will not cause safety, health or unreasonable traffic problems in the area; and 
The proposed use is justified based on facts presented to indicate the need for such use, as call for in the Commerce Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the C-2 General Commercial District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the C-2 General Commercial District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the C-2 Highway Commercial District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
2.07.003. - CBD - Central Business District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The CBD Central Business District, the most intensive use of land is permitted in combination with a variety of retail, service, and residential uses. The district is intended to provide for the central and headquarters functions of economic activity in the city. Activities in the CBD District are not normally oriented to serving residential areas in the same manner as the C-1 District. It is intended to keep this district centrally located and compact so that maximum convenience is afforded the users and occupants of the CBD District. 
In addition to meeting the requirements of this ordinance, all uses in the CBD must comply with the City of Commerce Design Guidelines, 1991, and as they may be amended. 
B.  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be allowed in the CBD Central Business District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
C.  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the CBD Central Business District in accordance with [chapter] 4.13 of this ordinance. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the CBD Central Business District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
2.07.004. - OCR - Office-Commercial Residential. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The OCR District is composed of service business, light retail establishments generally designed to serve nearby residential areas and low density single-family residential development land. All businesses shall be those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, noise, vibration, or traffic congestion, and should, when possible, be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
The site plan for such use must provide for adequate ingress and egress of vehicular traffic and shall not cause safety, health or traffic problems in the area. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the OCR Office Commercial Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the OCR Office Commercial Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the OCR Office Commercial Residential District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance: 
1.  Alternate tower structure. 
2.  Temporary building. 
(Ord. No. 2006-020, 9-11-06) 
CHAPTER 2.09: - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

[2.09.001. - M-1 Light Industrial District.] 
A.  Purpose and intent. The M-1 Light Industrial District is composed primarily of wholesale warehousing, trade shops, and light manufacturing uses, usually located on or near existing community facilities and transportation corridors. The intent of this district is to establish areas of industrial use which would be less objectionable by reasons of dust, odor, noise, congestion, etc., than those of the M-2 district. Such uses should be encouraged near existing similar uses and in accordance with the Commerce Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
E.  Prohibited uses: Designated uses not allowed. Bulk storage containers, not to exceed 10,000 gallons for petroleum, natural gas or other flammable gasses or liquids, other than as an accessory use to a gasoline station or truck stop, leather and hide tanning and finishing, except taxidermy, mobile home (pre 1976), manufacturing other than finished stationary products, petroleum and coal products manufacturing other than asphalt plants and solid waste combustors or incinerators. 
F.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous products. A manufacturing or industrial activity that produces any of the following as products or by-products of the manufacturing process is prohibited: Caustic or corrosive acids, chlorine or other noxious gasses, explosives, fertilizer or glue, products involving hair or fur. 
G.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous processes. A manufacturing or industrial use that involves any of the following is prohibited; tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy, petroleum refining, processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast, rendering or refining of fats and oils and wood preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-005B, § 1, 4-11-2005) 
2.09.002. - M-2 - Heavy Manufacturing. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The M-2 Heavy Manufacturing District is primarily composed of heavy or intense industrial uses. Such uses should be as isolated as possible from major residential areas but should be reasonably accessible to community facilities such as water, sewer, etc., and major transportation corridors. Since this district provides the least protection from the encroachment of undesirable uses, extreme care should be taken by governing authorities to locate such uses in existing industrial parks, until such areas are filled, or until" the need for additional areas is evident. Other districts outlined by buffer areas should be employed where possible between this district and other less intensive areas, particularly residential or light commercial districts. 
B.  Principal use and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the M-2 Heavy Manufacturing District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
C.  Accessory use and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the M-2 Heavy Industrial District in accordance with section 4.13 of this ordinance. 
D.  Conditional use. Conditional uses shall be permitted in the M-2 Heavy Industrial District in accordance with section 2.04.001 of this ordinance. 
Article 3: - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 
CHAPTER 3.05. - OPEN SPACE DESIGN 

3.05.001. - OSD - Open space design overlay district (OSD). 
A.  Purpose and intent. The intent of this district is to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a unified development plan rather than under lot-by-lot regulation. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities, and flexibility in design. The city gains the advantages of variety in building types, compatibility of uses and optimum community development. Review and approval of the development plan by the commerce mayor and council provides an opportunity to assure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood in which the development is located. 
The OSD district is not intended to encourage greater density of development, but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning and to assure the provision of park and recreation facilities for the use of the occupants of the development. 
The purpose of the open space overlay district is to: 
1.  Allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential development to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land; 
2.  Encourage the permanent preservation of a portion of otherwise developable property; 
3.  Maintain commerce's small town character and land use patterns that preserve open space; 
4.  Protect scenic vistas from development which would destroy or obstruct such vistas; 
5.  Preserve unique and significant natural, historical and archeological resources, including groundwater recharge areas, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands, wildlife habitats, historic features, and unique topography; 
6.  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation associated with development; 
7.  Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public services in a more economical and efficient manner; 
8.  Protect existing and potential drinking water supplies; and, 
9.  Encourage a less sprawling form of development. 
These standards are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles which can produce creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within the city, preserve taxable values, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  General design standards. 
1.  The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal. Conflicts between development and the rural environment should be minimized. For example, truck houselots and driveways into wooded lots is recommended. 
2.  The orientation of individual building sites shall be such as to maintain maximum natural topography and cover. Topography, tree cover, and natural drainageways shall be treated as fixed determinants of road and lot configuration rather than as malleable elements that can be changed to follow a preferred development scheme. 
3.  Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve natural topography, cover, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cut and fill; to reduce traffic speeds; and to preserve and enhance views and vistas on or off the subject parcel. All streets within the open space development shall be public streets. At least one major access with safe and adequate connections to an existing public street must be provided for every 100 dwelling units proposed in the OSD development. 
4.  Maintain or create a buffer of natural vegetation of at least 100 feet in width adjacent to surface waters and wetlands. 
5.  Maintain unblocked or uninterrupted scenic views and vistas, particularly as seen from public roads or as designated in the Commerce Comprehensive Plan. For example, a 100-foot deep no-build buffer is recommended to screen homes from the street and vice versa. 
6.  The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures, or architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable. 
7.  Protect the habitat areas of species listed as rare or endangered by the department of natural resources, freshwater wetlands and natural heritage inventory. 
8.  The open space shall be reasonably contiguous, coherent, and, if the tract of land abuts adjacent open space or other permanently protected open space, it shall connect with that adjacent or permanently protected open space. 
C.  Density. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed shall equal the number of dwelling units which could reasonably be expected to be developed on the property under the underlying zoning district, in full conformance with zoning, Subdivision Regulations, health codes, and other local, state and federal requirements. 
D.  Minimum dimensional requirements for residential lots. 
1.  The building envelope shall not exceed 15 feet beyond the building footprint with the exception of one 15-foot wide construction entrance to the site and the location of underground utilities. In the design process the most suitable areas for development should be shown. Areas beyond these building envelopes should be restricted against development. Building envelope lines should not be drawn into wetlands, floodplains, or steep slopes (slopes in excess of 25 percent) and shall not include the tops of ridge lines. Building envelopes shall avoid open fields as much as possible. Building envelopes shall be located on the edges of fields and in wooded areas to minimize the visual impact of development. 
2.  Minimum frontage: Not less than 75 feet. Lots located on the turnaround of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of 40 feet of street frontage providing a front building line is designated on the site plan for such a lot and the width of the lot at this building line is at least equal to the minimum frontage requirement. 
3.  The front or rear face of a dwelling unit shall be not less than 50 feet from the front or rear face of another dwelling unit. The side face of a single-family dwelling shall be not less than 20 feet from the side face of another such building and not less than 40 feet from the front or rear face of another such building. 
4.  No dwelling unit shall be situated so as to face the rear of another dwelling unit within the subdivision unless terrain differences or screening will provide effective visual separation. 
5.  The front, side and rear setback lines shall be shown on the final plat. 
6.  OSD development may utilize zero-lot-line construction. See section 4.28 for zero-lot-line requirements. 
7.  Buffer areas: All single-family dwellings and accessory structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from adjacent tracts of land. 
8.  Accessory uses: All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the front building line but no closer than ten feet to the rear lot line. 
E.  Minimum percentage of open space. The minimum percentage of land that shall be designated as permanent open space, not to be further subdivided, and protected through a conservation easement, shall be as specified below: 
1.  A minimum of 40 percent of the total tract areas of which one-half percent shall be designated as greenspace and the other one-half percent shall be open space, after deducting the following kinds of unbuildable land: 
a.  Wetlands; 
b.  All of the floodway and floodway fringes within the 100-year floodplain, as shown on official FEMA maps; 
c.  Land with slopes exceeding 25 percent, or soils subject to slumping; 
d.  Land required for street rights-of-way (ten percent of the net tract area); 
e.  Land under permanent easement prohibiting future development (including easement for drainage, access, and utilities). 
The above areas shall generally be designated as undivided open space, to facilitate easement monitoring and enforcement, and to promote appropriate management by a single entity according to approved land management standards. 
2.  All undivided open space and any lot capable of further subdivision shall be restricted from further subdivision through a permanent conservation easement, recorded with the clerk of the court. 
3.  If active recreation is proposed for the open space, at least 25 percent of the minimum required open space shall be suitable for active recreation but no more than 50 percent shall be utilized for that purpose, in order to preserve a reasonable proportion of natural areas on the site. The purposes for which open space areas are proposed shall be documented by the applicant. 
4.  Stormwater management ponds or basins may be included as part of the minimum required open space, as may land within the rights-of-way for underground pipelines. However, power lines shall not be include as comprising part of the minimum required open space. 
F.  Location of open space. The location of open space conserved through compact residential development shall be consistent with the policies contained in comprehensive plan and with the recommendations contained in this section and the following section. 
Open space shall be comprised of two types of land: "Primary Conservation Areas" and "Secondary Conservation Areas." All lands within both Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas are required to be protected by a permanent conservation easement, prohibiting further development, and setting other standards safeguarding the site's special resources from negative changes. 
1.  Primary conservation areas consists of wetlands, lands that are generally inundated (under ponds, lakes, creeks, etc.), land within the 100-year floodplain, slopes exceeding 15 percent, soils subject to slumping, significant natural areas of endangered or threatened species, and mature woodlands. Mature woodlands include 
a.  Existing healthy tree masses, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
b.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than six inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
These primary conservation areas are deducted from the total parcel acreage to produce the "Adjusted Tract Acreage," on which density shall be based (for both conventional and conservation subdivisions). 
2.  Secondary conservation areas. In addition to the primary conservation areas, at least 50 percent of the remaining land shall be designated and permanently protected. Full density credit shall be allowed for land in this category that would otherwise be buildable under local, state, and federal regulations, so that their development potential is not reduced by this designation. Such density credit may be applied to other unconstrained parts of the site. 
Although the locations of primary conservation areas are predetermined by the locations of floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, and soils subject to slumping, greater latitude exists in the designation of secondary conservation areas. 
The location of secondary conservation areas shall be guided by the maps and policies contained in the comprehensive plan and shall typically include all or part of the following kinds of resources: aquifer recharge areas, areas with highly permeable ("excessively drained") soil, significant wildlife habitat areas, sites listed on the Natural Heritage Inventory, prime farmland, historic, archaeological or cultural features listed (or eligible to be listed) on National, state or county register or inventories, and scenic views into the property from existing public roads. Secondary conservation areas therefore typically consist of upland forest, meadows, pastures, and farm fields, part of the ecologically connected matrix of natural areas significant for wildlife habitat, water quality protection, and other reasons. Although the resource lands listed as potential secondary conservation areas may comprise more than half of the remaining land on a development parcel (after primary conservation areas have been deducted), no applicant shall be required to designate more than 50 percent of that remaining land as a secondary conservation area. 
G.  General locations standards. All subdivisions shall be designed around both the primary and secondary conservation areas, which together constitute the total required open space. The design process should therefore commence with the delineation of all potential open space, after which potential house sites are located. Following that, access road alignments are identified, with lot lines being drawn in as the final step. 
Both primary and secondary conservation areas shall be placed in undivided preserves, which may adjoin housing areas that have been designed more compactly to create larger areas that may be enjoyed equally by all residents of the development. 
Undivided open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within a OSD subdivision. To achieve this, the majority of houselots should abut undivided open space in order to provide direct views and access. Safe and convenient pedestrian access to the open space from all lots not adjoining the open space shall be provided (except in the case of farmland or other resource areas vulnerable to trampling damage or human disturbance). Where the undivided open space is designated as separate, noncontiguous parcels, no parcel shall consist of less than three acres in area nor have a length-to-width ratio in excess of 4:1, except such areas that are specifically designed as village greens, ballfields, upland buffers to wetlands, waterbodies or watercourses, or trail links. 
H.  Interconnected open space network. As more open space subdivisions are developed, the protected open spaces in each new subdivision will eventually adjoin each other, ultimately forming an interconnected network of primary and secondary conservation areas across the city. To avoid the issue of the "taking of land without compensation," the only elements of this interconnected network that will necessarily be open to the public are those lands that have been required to be dedicated for public use, never more than ten percent of a development parcel gross acreage. 
I.  Requirements for open space. It is the intent of these regulations that open space be comprised of buildable and non-buildable lands. Land so designated as open space shall be in a location and configuration that relates to the ultimate purpose of the open space (i.e., outdoor recreation, landscape protection, habitat protection, etc.). Development should be designed around these natural features. 
1.  At least 50 percent of the required open space shall be forested, preferably hardwood, and shall be dedicated and used for open space. 
2.  Up to 50 percent of the required open space may be composed of land that is pasture/agricultural land. 
3.  No more than 20 percent of the required open space may be in land that is located in a floodplain or wetlands. 
4.  Rights-of-way for streets, above ground utility easements, drainage easements, and detention ponds shall be excluded from land considered for open space. 
5.  If the development is to be built in phases, 50 percent of the open space of the entire development must be shown on the Phase I final plat and must be deeded to the Home Owners Association or other entity responsible for its maintenance and payment of taxes. This requirement must be met prior to approval of the final plat. 
J.  Permitted uses of the open space. The following are permitted uses of open space: 
1.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
2.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, or similar conservation-oriented area(s); 
3.  Walking or bicycle trails surfaced with permeable materials; 
4.  Parks, community gardens, playing fields or recreation facilities; 
5.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses in which conservation oriented methods are utilized; 
6.  Landscaped stormwater detention areas; 
7.  Easement from drainage, access, and sewerage or water lines, or other similar public purposes; 
8.  Underground utility rights-of-way. 
K.  Design standards for public roads. It is the intent of this section to minimize the amount of site disruption caused by roadways and the associated grading required for their construction. 
1.  Streets shall follow existing contours to minimize the extent of cuts and fills. 
2.  Maximum centerline radius for shall conform to the City of Commerce Subdivision Regulations. However, when topography or aesthetic design concerns prohibit streets which typically take right angle turns followed by an intervening straight segment, reverse curves can be used (no intervening straight segment is required). 
3.  In order to stimulate intra-neighborhood accessibility, all streets within the subdivision shall interconnect as much as possible. 
The paved width of each street shall conform to section 10.10 of the City of Commerce Subdivision Regulations. 
Where the interconnection of a street would not promote the purpose of the open space design, non-interconnected streets (cul-de-sacs) are permissible. A cul-de-sac shall not serve more than 25 single-family dwellings and shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length. Should a cul-de-sac be desired, cul-de-sac streets shall be terminated by turnarounds with an internal turning radius of at least 20 feet. Cul-de-sacs turnarounds shall be off-set from the road centerline and shall include a vegetated center island. 
4.  Curbing should be notched or intermittently detached so that water may run into vegetated swales. This will allow infiltration of the water into areas best suited to retain and absorb the water. Curb notches shall also be installed in the center island of cul-de-sacs to maintain drainage through the vegetated space. 
L.  Required improvements. 
1.  Water supply. Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a public or community water system approved by the City of Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529. 
2.  Sewerage. All sewerage systems within the development shall meet the requirements of the City of Commerce, Jackson County, Georgia 30529. 
3.  Utilities. All utilities within the subdivision shall be underground. 
4.  Stormwater runoff. The volume and velocity of stormwater runoff after development shall not exceed the volume and velocity of stormwater runoff prior to development. 
5.  Storm drainage system. The developer shall provide a storm drainage system for the subdivision which shall be of sufficient size and design to collect, carry off, and dispose of all predictable surface water run-off within the development and shall be so constructed as to conform with the statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the State of Georgia and Commerce, Georgia. Proposed storm drainage system shall be approved by the zoning administrator. 
6.  Fire hydrant. The developer shall provide a fire hydrant within 500 feet of each dwelling unit. 
7.  Sidewalks. A five-foot, paved, sidewalk shall be installed on both sides of the road. 
M.  Evaluation criteria. In evaluating the layout of lots and open space, the following criteria will be considered by the planning commission and mayor and council as indicating design appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purposes of this ordinance. Diversity and originality in lot layout shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between development and conservation areas. Accordingly, the planning commission shall evaluate proposals to determine whether the proposed conceptual preliminary plan: 
1.  Protects floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from cleaning, grading, filling, or construction (except as may be approved by the mayor and council for essential infrastructure or active or passive recreation amenities). 
2.  Preserves and maintains mature woodlands, existing fields, pastures, meadows, and orchards, and creates sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses. For example, locating houselots and driveways within wooded areas is generally recommended, with two exceptions. The first involves significant wildlife habitat or mature woodlands that raise an equal or greater preservation concern, as described in subsections 5. and 8. below. The second involves predominantly agricultural areas, where remnant tree groups provide the only natural areas for wildlife. 
3.  Visually buffers from existing public roads, such as by a planting screen consisting of a variety of indigenous native trees, shrubs, and wildflowers. If development must be located on open fields or pastures because of greater constraints in all other part of the site, dwellings should be sited on the least prime agricultural soils, or in locations at the far edge of a field, as seen from existing public roads. 
4.  Maintains or creates an upland buffer of natural native species vegetation of at least 100 feet in depth adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs, lakes and ponds. 
5.  Designs around existing hedgerows and treelines between fields or meadows, and minimizes impacts on large woodlands (greater than five acres), especially those containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife habitat, or those not degraded by invasive vines. Also, woodlands of any size on highly erodible soils with slopes greater than ten percent should be avoided. However, woodlands in poor condition with limited management potential can provide suitable locations for residential development. When any woodland is developed, great care shall be taken to design all disturbed areas (for buildings, roads, yards, septic disposal fields, etc.) in locations where there are no large trees or obvious wildlife areas, to the fullest extent that is practicable. 
6.  Leaves scenic views and vistas unblocked or uninterrupted, particularly as seen from public thoroughfares. For example, in open agrarian landscapes, a deep "no-build, no-plant" buffer is recommended along the public thoroughfare where those views or vistas are prominent or locally significant. The concept of "foreground meadows," with homes facing the public thoroughfare across a broad grassy expanse is strongly preferred to mere buffer strips, with or without berms or vegetative screening. In wood areas where the sense of enclosure is a feature that should be maintained, a deep "no-build, no-cut" buffer should be respected, to preserve existing vegetation. 
7.  Avoids siting new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges, by taking advantage of lower topographic features. 
8.  Protects wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
9.  Designs around and preserves sites of historic, archaeological, or cultural value, and their environs, insofar as needed to safeguard the character of the feature, including stone walls, spring houses, barn foundations, cellar holes, earthworks, and burial grounds. 
10.  Protects rural roadside character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting directly onto existing public roads. Establishes buffer zones along the corridor of rural roads with historic buildings, stone walls, hedgerows, etc. 
11.  Landscaped common areas, cul-de-sac islands, and both sides of new streets with native specie shade trees and flowering shrubs with high wildlife conservation value. Deciduous shade trees shall be planted at 40-foot intervals on both sides of each street, so that the neighborhood will have a stately and traditional appearance when they grow and mature. These trees shall generally be located between the side walk (if required) and the edge of the street, within a planting strip not less than five feet in width. 
12.  Provides active recreational areas in suitable locations that offer convenient access by residents and adequate screening from nearby houselots. 
13.  Includes a pedestrian circulation system designed to assure that pedestrians can walk safely and easily on the site, between properties and activities or special features within the neighborhood open space system. All roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails which in turn should link with potential pen space on adjoining undeveloped parcels (or with existing open space on adjoining developed parcels, where applicable). 
14.  Provides open space that is reasonably contiguous. For example, fragmentation of open space should be minimized so that these resource areas are not divided into numerous small parcels located in various parts of the development. To the greatest extent practicable, this land shall be designed as a single block with logical, straightforward boundaries. Long thin strips of conservation land shall be avoided, unless the conservation feature is linear or unless such configuration is necessary to connect with other streams or trails. The open space shall generally abut existing or potential open space land on adjacent parcels (such as in other subdivisions, public parks, or properties owned by or leased to private land conservation organizations). 
N.  Procedural requirements. 
1.  General. 
a.  Process overview. The sequence of actions prescribed in this article is as listed below. These steps shall be followed sequentially and may be combined only at the discretion of the planning commission: 
(1)  Pre-application discussion; 
(2)  Existing features (site analysis) plan; 
(3)  On-site walkabout by planning commissioners and applicant; 
(4)  Pre-submission conference; 
(5)  Conceptual preliminary plan (conceptual illustration of open space, potential house sites, street alignments, and tentative lot lines, prepared according to the four-step design process described herein). 
(6)  Preliminary plan submission, determination of completeness, review of overall planning concepts, and decision. 
(7)  Preliminary engineer certification; 
(8)  Final plan submission, determination of completeness, review, and decision; 
(9)  Approval of mayor and council; 
(10)  Recording at clerk of court's office. 
2.  Elements of the preliminary plan process. 
a.  Pre-application discussion. A pre-application discussion is strongly encouraged between the applicant, the site designer(s), and the planning commission. The purpose of this informal meeting is to discuss the applicant's objectives in relation to the city's official policies and ordinance requirements. The city may designate a consultant experienced in development design and in the protection of natural features and open lands to meet with the applicant and to attend or conduct meetings required under this ordinance. 
b.  Existing features (site analysis) plan. Plans analyzing each site's special features are required for all proposed subdivisions, as they form the basis of the design process for greenway lands, house locations, street alignments, and lot lines. The applicant or his/her representative shall bring a copy of the existing features (site analysis) plan to the on-site walkabout. Requirements for existing features plans must include (1) a contour map based at least upon topographical maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey; (2) the location of severely constraining elements such as steep slopes (over 25 percent), wetlands, watercourses, intermittent streams and 100-year floodplains, and all rights-of-way and easement; (3) soil boundaries as shown on USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service medium-intensity maps; and (4) the location of significant features such as woodlands, treelines, open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from the property, watershed divides and drainage ways, fences or stone walls, rock outcrops, and existing structures, roads, track and trails, and any sites listed on the Georgia Natural Heritage Inventory. 
These existing features plans shall identify both primary conservation areas and secondary conservation areas. Together, these primary and secondary conservation areas comprise the development's proposed open space. The existing features plan shall form the basis for the conceptual preliminary plan, which shall show the tentative location of houses, streets, lot lines, and open space in, the new subdivision, according to the four-step design process described in subsection f of this section. 
c.  On-site walkabout. After the existing features plan has been prepared, the planning commission shall schedule a mutually convenient date to walk the property with the applicant and his/her site designer. The purpose of this visit is to familiarize city officials with the property's special features, and to provide them an informal opportunity to offer guidance to the applicant regarding the tentative location of the secondary conservation areas and potential house locations and street alignments. If this visit is not scheduled before submission of the sketch plan or the conceptual preliminary plan, it should occur soon thereafter. 
d.  Pre-submission conference. Prior to the submission of the sketch plan or a conceptual preliminary plan, the applicant shall meet with the planning commission to discuss how the four-step approach to designing subdivisions could be applied to the subject property. At the discretion of the planning commission this conference may be combined with the on-site walkabout. 
e.  Conceptual preliminary plan. After the pre-submission conference, a sketch plan or a conceptual preliminary plan shall be submitted for the proposed subdivision. Conceptual preliminary plan refers to a preliminary engineered sketch plan drawn to illustrate initial thoughts about a conceptual layout for open space, house sites, and street alignments. This is the stage where drawings are tentatively illustrated, before heavy engineering costs are incurred in the design of any proposed subdivision layout. These drawings shall be prepared by a team that includes a landscape architect and a civil engineer. 
A conceptual preliminary plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the zoning administrator at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting for review and for the purpose of securing early agreement on the overall pattern of streets, houselots, primary and secondary conservation areas, and potential trail linkages (where applicable), prior to any significant expenditure on engineering costs in the design of streets, stormwater management, or the accurate delineation of internal lot boundaries. 
Within 30 days of receiving the conceptual preliminary plan, the planning commission shall approve, disapprove, or approve the plan with conditions, stating its reasons in writing. Applicant shall then submit a detailed preliminary plan which shall contain all the customary engineering data. The detailed preliminary plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting. Within 30 days of receiving the detailed preliminary plan, the planning commission shall approve, disapprove, table or approve the plan with conditions, stating its reasons in writing. Either or both of these time periods may be formally extended if mutually agreeable to the applicant and the planning commission. 
f.  Four-step process. Each sketch plan or conceptual preliminary plan shall follow a four-step design process, as described below. When the conceptual preliminary plan is submitted, applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to the planning commission that these four design steps were followed by their site designers in determining the layout of their proposed streets, houselots, and open space. This process shall be accomplished during a 30-day period as described above. 
(1)  Designating the open space. During the first step, all potential conservation areas (both primary and secondary) are identified, using the existing features plan. Primary conservation areas shall consist of wetlands, floodplains, slopes over 25 percent, and soils susceptible to slumping. Secondary conservation areas shall comprise 50 percent of the remaining land, and shall include the most sensitive and noteworthy natural, scenic, and cultural resources on that remaining half of the property. 
Guidance on which parts of the remaining land to classify as Secondary Conservation Areas shall be based upon: 
i.  The procedures described in "Conservation Design for Subdivisions" A Practical Guide to Creating Open Space Networks" produced by the Natural Lands Trust and published by Island Press; 
ii.  On-site visits or "walkabouts," 
iii.  The open space location criteria contained in subsections 3.05.001(E), (F) and (I); 
iv.  The evaluation criteria listed in subsection 3.05.001(M); 
v.  Information from published data and reports; and 
vi.  Conversations with existing or recent owners of the property, and members of the mayor and council and planning commission. 
(2)  Location of house sites. During the second step, potential house sites are tentatively located. Because the proposed location of houses within each lot represents a significant decision with potential impacts on the ability of the development to meet the 14 evaluation criteria contained in subsection 3.05.001(M), subdivision applicants shall identify tentative house sites on the conceptual preliminary plan and proposed house sites on the detailed final plan. House sites should generally be located not closer than 100 feet from primary conservation areas, but may be situated within 50 feet of secondary conservation areas, in order to enjoy views of the latter without negatively impacting the former. The building "footprint" of proposed residences maybe changed by more than 50 feet in any direction with approval from the planning commission. Changes involving less than 50 feet do not require approval. 
(3)  Street and lot layout. The third step consists of aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access to each house in the most reasonable and economical way. When lots and access streets are laid out, they shall be located in a way that avoids or at least minimizes adverse impacts on both the primary and secondary conservation areas. To the greater extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes over 15 percent shall be strongly discouraged. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs to be maintained by the township and to facilitate easy access to and from homes in different parts of the property (and on adjoining parcels). Where cul-de-sacs are necessary, those serving six or fewer homes may be designed with "hammerheads" facilitation three point turns. Cul-de-sacs serving more than six homes shall generally be designed with a central island containing indigenous trees and shrubs (either conserved on site or planted) 
(4)  Lot lines. The fourth step is simply to draw in the lot lines (where applicable). These are generally drawn midway between house locations. 
g.  Preliminary engineering certification. Prior to approval of the conceptual preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit to the planning commission a "Preliminary Engineering Certification" that the approximate layout of proposed streets, houselots, and open space lands complies with the city's zoning and subdivision ordinances, particularly those sections governing the design of subdivision streets and stormwater management facilities. This certification requirement is meant to provide the city with assurance that the proposed plan is able to be accomplished within the current regulations of the township. The certification shall also note any waivers needed to implement the plan as drawn. 
O.  Ownership and maintenance of the open space. 
1.  General Different ownership and management options apply to the permanently protected open space created through the development process. The open space shall remain undivided and may be owned and managed by a homeowners' association or a recognized land trust. A public land dedication, not exceeding ten percent of the total parcel size, may be required by the city, through this open space, to facilitate trail connections. A narrative describing ownership use and maintenance responsibilities shall be submitted for all common and public improvements, utilities, and open spaces. 
2.  Ownership standards. Common open space within a development shall be owned, administered, and maintained by any of the following methods, either individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the city. 
a.  Homeowner's association. The undivided open space and associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners' association. The association shall be formed and operated under the following provisions: 
(1)  The developer shall provide a description of the association including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open space. 
(2)  The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be operated with a financial subsidy from the developer, before the sale of any lots within the development. 
(3)  Membership in the association is automatic (mandatory) for all purchasers of homes therein and their successors. The conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to homeowners shall be identified in the bylaws. 
(4)  The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance and taxes on undivided open space, enforceable by liens placed by the city on the association. The association may place liens on the homes or houselots of its members who fail to pay their association dues in a timely manner. Such liens may require the imposition of penalty interest charges. 
(5)  The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of maintaining and developing such undivided open space. Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws. 
(6)  In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here permitted, of undivided open space land by the homeowners' association, or of the assumption of maintenance of undivided open space land by the city, notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the development. 
(7)  The association shall have or hire adequate staff to administer common facilities and properly and continually maintain the undivided open space. 
(8)  The homeowners' association may lease open space lands to any other qualified person, or corporation, for operation and maintenance of open space lands, but such a lease agreement shall provide: 
i.  That the residents of the development shall at all times have access to the open space lands contained therein; 
ii.  That the undivided open space to be leased shall be maintained for the purposes set forth in this ordinance; and 
iii.  That the operation of open space facilities may be for the benefit of the residents only, or may be open to the residents of the city, at the election of the developer and/or homeowners' association, as the case may be. 
(9)  The lease shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and council and any transfer or assignment of the lease shall be further subject to the approval of the of the mayor and council. Lease agreements so entered upon shall be recorded by the clerk of court within 30 days of their execution and a copy of the recorded lease shall be filed the city clerk. 
CHAPTER 3.06: - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE 

3.06.001. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
A.  Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of Georgia has in Georgia Code Annotated, Article IX, Section II, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the City of Commerce, Georgia does ordain as follows: 
B.  Findings of fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of Commerce, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
C.  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
2.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
3.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
4.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
5.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
D.  Objectives. The objects of this ordinance are: 
1.  To protect human life and health. 
2.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
3.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas. 
4.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
5.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
6.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
7.  To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
3.06.002. - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to which this ordinance applies. This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Commerce, Georgia. 
B.  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated ;daterule;, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for (unincorporated Jackson County) are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (There are no known areas officially identified at this time.) 
C.  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be require in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
D.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
E.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
F.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under the state statutes. 
G.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Commerce or by nay officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
H.  Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Commerce from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
3.06.003. - Administration. 
A.  Designation of ordinance administrator. The building official of the City of Commerce is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the building official on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 3.06.004(B)(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
2.  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
C.  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the building official shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied; 
2.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
3.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Article 2 Section B, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Article 4. 
4.  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 3.06.003(B)(2). 
5.  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 3.06.003(B)(2). 
6.  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 3.06.003(B)(1)(c) and subsection 3.06.004(B)(2) or (D)(2). 
7.  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
8.  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
9.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. 
10.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
3.06.004. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of structure; 
2.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
3.  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
4.  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
5.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
6.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
7.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
8.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
9.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
10.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
B.  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.06.004(A)(4), "Elevated Buildings". 
2.  Non-residential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyance. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 3.06.003(C)(6). 
3.  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: 
(1)  Individual lots or parcels, 
(2)  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions. 
(3)  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or 
(4)  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
(2)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 3.06.004(A)(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
(2)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 3.06.004(B)(3)(a)(1), above. 
4.  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 3.06.002(B), are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 3.06.004(B)(4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 3.06.004. 
C.  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 3.06.002(B) where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided by a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
1.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 3.06.002(B), then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 3.06.004. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2. and 3.) shall apply: 
2.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
3.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.06.004(A)(4) "Elevated Buildings". 
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
D.  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 3.06.002(B), may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 3.06.004(A)(4), "Elevated Buildings". 
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
2.  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified firm flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyance. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 3.06.003(B)(1)(c) and 3.06.003(B)(2). 
3.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
E.  Standards for subdivisions. 
1.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
2.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
3.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
4.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
3.06.005. - Variance procedures. 
A.  The board of zoning appeals as established by the mayor and city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Jackson County, as provided in state statute O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
E.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  In reviewing such requests, the board of zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other section of this ordinance. 
H.  Conditions for variances. 
1.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
2.  The provisions of this ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variance shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
3.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
4.  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
I.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
3.06.006. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
A.  Addition (to an existing building). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction". 
B.  Appeal. A request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
C.  Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
D.  Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in subsection 3.06.002(B). 
E.  Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
F.  Basement. That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
G.  Building. Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
H.  Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
I.  Elevated building. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
J.  *Existing construction. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 13, 2001, [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)] 
K.  *Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 13, 2001. [i.e. the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
L.  Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
M.  Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal water; or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
N.  Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
O.  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
P.  Flood insurance study. The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Q.  Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
R.  Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
S.  Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
T.  Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individual in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
U.  Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
V.  Manufactured home. A building, transportable in one ore more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
W.  Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
X.  National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). As corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Y.  *New construction. Any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 13, 2001 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
Z.  *New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 13, 2001. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
AA.  Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis. 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
BB.  Start of construction. The date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
CC.  Structure. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
DD.  Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
EE.  Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be: 
1.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 
2.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
FF.  Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions. Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
GG.  Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
3.06.007. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
Article 4: - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS 
CHAPTER 4.01: - STANDARDS, SPECIFICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS 

4.01.001. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for uniform application of certain standards, specifications, and improvements as a condition of project approval and permit issuance for development permits, subdivisions, building permits, conditional use permits, or other permits issued by Commerce. 
4.01.002. - Curb, gutter, and drainage requirements. 
All future or new street frontages shall include a curb and gutter. 
4.01.003. - Driveway and parking surface. 
For areas that must unavoidably be paved, porous pavement materials limit runoff at the paved source. They eliminate auto oil and other street pollutants by treating them in contact with the soil wherever they are generated. 
All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced in a porous pavement material. Porous pavement shall be used on all public and private driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, bike and footpaths walkways, and pedestrian plazas and courts, except where it is infeasible due to site-specific constraints such as steep unstable slopes, swelling soils, proximity of structural foundations, or steep slope of pavement subgrade. In new developments and in additions to developments where similar porous pavements have not previously been used, representative portions of porous pavements shall be marked by permanent stencil or sign identifying the porous pavements and special restraint that needs to be taken in using and maintaining them. 
4.01.004. - Stormwater, stormwater detention, and stormwater retention. 
Adequate provision shall be made for the retention, detention, or discharge of stormwater, ground water, surface water, subsurface drainage, and roof runoff as required by the zoning administrator. 
CHAPTER 4.02: - PARKING REGULATIONS 

4.02.001. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the development of parking facilities, access to private and public property, and ensure public health and safety with facilities which safely accommodate vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians. 
4.02.002. - General. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  New development. The off-street parking standards apply to any new development and to any new use established. 
2.  Expansions and alterations. The off-street parking standards apply when an existing structure or use is expanded or enlarged. Additional off-street parking space shall be required only to serve the enlarged or expanded areas, not the entire building or use. The zoning administrator may require increases in parking for non-conforming parking areas when found necessary to ensure adequate off-street parking. 
3.  Change or use. Off-street parking shall be required for any change of use or change of operation that would result in a requirement for more parking than the existing use. Additional parking shall be required only in proportion to the extent of the change, not for the entire building or use. 
4.02.003. - Off-street parking. 
Within Commerce, Georgia, off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted or conditional use is established in accordance with this ordinance. 
A.  General requirements. For the purpose of this ordinance the following general requirements are specified: 
1.  The term "off-street parking space" means a space at least nine feet wide and 20 feet in length with a minimum net area of 180 square feet, excluding area for egress and ingress and maneuverability of vehicles. 
2.  If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the zoning administrator may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within 600 feet of the property line of the principal use. The parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
3.  The required number of parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time. 
4.  Area reserved for off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, and unless equivalent parking space is provided to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator. 
5.  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
6.  All parking within the commercial districts shall be to the side or rear of the principal structure. 
B.  Parking space requirements for all zoning districts. Off-street automobile storage of parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal in or to at least the minimum requirements for the specific land use set forth. 

 
C.  Off-street parking for land uses with unique parking requirements. Land uses which have widely varying parking demand characteristics, make it impossible to specify a single off-street parking standard. Uses found by the zoning administrator to have unique parking requirements shall comply with the provisions of this subsection. 
1.  A developer proposing to develop or expand a land use with unique parking requirements shall submit a parking study that provides justification for the number of off-street parking spaces proposed. A parking study shall include: 
a.  Estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, or other acceptable estimates as approved by the zoning administrator, and should include other reliable data collected from uses of combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, location, or parameters of the use that may be estimated to parking requirements. 
b.  The study shall document the source of data used, and methods used to develop the recommendations. After reviewing the parking study, the zoning administrator shall establish a minimum off-street parking standard for the proposed use. 
2.  Appeals of the administrative decision may be made to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with section 6.07. 
4.02.004. - Rules for computing requirements. 
The following rules apply when computing off-street parking and loading requirements: 
A.  Multiple uses. Lots containing more than one use shall provide shared parking as specified in section 4.02.005. 
B.  Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces result in fractions, any fraction of one-half or less will be disregarded and any fraction of more than one-half will be rounded upward to the next highest whole number. 
C.  Area measurements. Unless otherwise specifically noted, all square footage-based parking and loading standards are to be computed on the basis of gross floor area. 
D.  Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in an off-street parking schedule, the zoning administrator shall apply the off-street parking standard specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or require a parking study in accordance with this chapter. 
4.02.005. - Shared parking. 
Two or more uses shall share parking facilities without providing the minimum number of on-site required spaces for each use, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  The minimum required number of parking spaces for the combined uses shall be reduced by 20 percent where hours of operation overlap and the uses within the businesses share general customer traffic. 
B.  Off-site spaces shall be within 600 feet walking distance of a building entrance or use. If the pedestrian access is to cross an arterial street, appropriate safety measures must be present to help the pedestrian cross the street. In any event, safe and convenient pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or path, must exist or be provided from the structure or use to the parking lot. 
C.  The parking facility to be shared must contain at least the minimum required spaces of the largest individual use sharing the lot and shall be developed to the extent of at least being paved and striped according to the standards of this ordinance. 
D.  The parking facility to be shared must be owned by the owner of one of the uses or leased for at least a 20-year term or through a permanent easement by the owner of the uses being served. 
E.  No changes shall be made to the shared parking facility which would reduce the parking provided for the uses, unless the owner of one of the uses makes other arrangements to provide parking. No such changes shall be made without approval of the zoning administrator. 
F.  Parking spaces to be shared must not be reserved for a specific person, individual, or use on a 24-hour basis. 
G.  Handicap parking spaces cannot be shared, unless the uses that are to share the spaces are adjacent to the handicap spaces and no inconvenience to the users of such spaces would be created. 
H.  Loading space shall not be shared. 
I.  Any proposed change in the use of a structure that shares a parking facility will require proof that adequate parking is available. 
J.  Off-site and shared parking may be used in combination to develop parking facilities, provided all the requirements of this section are met. 
4.02.006. - Stacking space for drive-through facilities. 
A.  Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pick-up areas. The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities: 
1.  Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on- and off-site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off-street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building. 
2.  Drive-through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
3.  Approach lanes for drive-through facilities shall have the following minimum widths: 
One lane:\12 feet per lane 
Two or more lanes:\10 feet per lane 
4.  All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of ten feet. 
5.  Alleys or driveways in residentially zoned areas adjacent to drive-through facilities shall not be used for circulation of customer traffic. 
6.  Each stacking space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet. 
B.  The number of stacking spaces shall be provided as follows: 

 
4.02.007. - Parking area site requirements. 
All off-street parking shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained according to the following requirements (except for residential lots in the residential zoning districts). Off-street parking includes parking spaces or lots for customers and employees. 
A.  All parking areas shall be hard surfaces with concrete or plant bituminous material and maintained in dustproof condition. 
B.  Lighting facilities shall be arranged so that light is reflected away from adjacent properties and streets. If individual light posts are integrated into or mounted on an exposed concrete base, the exposed concrete base cannot exceed six inches in height. 
C.  The parking area shall be adequately drained. 
D.  No sign shall be placed within the public right-of-way. Signs and planting strips shall not obstruct the visibility of drivers or pedestrians. 
4.02.008. - Use of required parking spaces. 
A.  Use of parking areas. Required off-street parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of licensed, motor vehicles in operating condition. Required spaces may not be used for the storage of vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, or building materials. 
B.  Use of parking areas for temporary events and sales. 
1.  A portion of a parking lot that allows at least 75 percent of the remaining legal parking spaces to be used for parking in conformance with the standards of this chapter may be set aside for purposes of a temporary event, such as a "tent sale," "sidewalk/parking lot sale," or other permitted activity. These events may not exceed seven consecutive days in length and may not occur more than once each calendar quarter. 
2.  The property owner and operator of the licensed business at the location are jointly responsible for ensuring that events blocking parking lots do not result in unsafe traffic or circulation conditions and ensuring that there is adequate fire and emergency vehicle access. The police chief, fire chief or their designee may order the event canceled and removed without hearing or notice if found that the arrangement of the temporary event or sale interferes with safe flow of traffic or emergency vehicle access to a site. 
3.  The property owner, business licensed at the site, and entity responsible for the event are jointly responsible for ensuring there is adequate parking at the event site. The use of public right-of-way for event parking is prohibited. Parking arrangements may be made for use of adjoining or nearby parking areas with a 300-foot radius, but a copy of the agreements shall be in writing and filed with the zoning administrator at least two working days prior to the event. 
C.  Long-term vendors located in parking lots. 
1.  Temporary long-term use of a parking lot for a vendor (for example but not limited to: Christmas trees, seasonal food sales) that will be located in the parking lot for more than seven consecutive days may be permitted by the zoning administrator provided that a copy of a written agreement for use of the parking area is submitted to the zoning administrator prior to the establishment of the use. 
2.  A site plan showing the location of the facility and an indication of the total number of existing spaces in the parking lot and parking to be removed by the vendor shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. 
3.  In no case shall a long-term vendor be permitted to remove more than five percent of the subject property's parking spaces from general usage. 
CHAPTER 4.03: - OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE 
Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided as hereinafter required by this Ordinance. 

4.03.001. - Size of off-street loading spaces. 
Each off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 14 feet in height, 12 feet in width, and 55 feet in length. However, upon sufficient demonstration that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by shorter trucks, the zoning administrator may reduce the minimum length accordingly to as little as 35 feet. 
4.03.002. - Connection to street or alley. 
Each required off-street loading space shall have direct access to a street or alley or have a driveway which offers satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. 
4.03.003. - Floor area over 10,000 square feet. 
Sufficient space for off-street loading and unloading must be provided for each hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building or similar use requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise, and having a floor area of more then 10,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof. Such space must be located so as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
4.03.004. - Floor area less than 10,000 square feet. 
Sufficient off-street loading space (not necessarily a full space if shared by adjacent establishments) must be provided for each commercial or industrial building requiring the receipt or distribution of materials for merchandise and having a floor area of less than 10,000 square feet. The space must be located so as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
4.03.005. - Location of off-street loading spaces. 
All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building which they are intended to serve, or on an adjacent lot when the loading spaces are shared with the use occupying said adjacent lot. 
4.03.006. - Permanent reservation. 
Area reserved for off-street loading in accordance with this ordinance must not be reduced or changed to any other use unless the permitted use that the off-street loading serves is discontinued or modified. However, equivalent loading space may be provided and approved by the zoning administrator. 
CHAPTER 4.04: - CURB CUTS AND VISION CLEARANCE 
The requirements for controlling curb cuts and maintaining vision clearance shall be as follows: 

4.04.001. - Curb cuts. 
No curb cut shall be less than nine feet nor greater than 30 feet in length unless the property will primarily serve tractor-trailer traffic. Single-family residential curb cuts shall not exceed 12 feet. Except in residential zoning districts, no curb cut shall be closer than 100 feet to another curb cut or access point. At street intersections, no curb cut or other access point shall be located closer to the intersection than is necessary to serve the property but in no case shall be closer than 50 feet from the intersecting point of the two street right-of-way or property lines involved (or such lines extended in case of a rounded corner), whichever is the least restrictive. 
Adjacent properties are strongly encouraged to utilize shared parking arrangements as outlined in section 4.02.005 in an effort to minimize curb cuts and impervious parking area. 
A permit must be obtained from the Georgia Department of Transportation before curb cuts or any other point of access is authorized onto state-owned highway rights-of-way from abutting property. 
4.04.002. - Vision clearance. 
In all zoning districts, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee or other obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half feet and ten feet from the ground level is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or railroad lines, of a street intersection with a railroad line, or of curb cuts or driveways. 
CHAPTER 4.05: - CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS 
All streets in Commerce, Georgia, are divided into the following classes. See Chapter 1.03 "Streets" for diagram of street classifications. 

4.05.001. - Arterials. 
A.  Principal arterial. Streets and highways which serve major activity centers and emphasize traffic service rather than access to abutting land. Principal arterials include all limited access freeways, expressways or parkways, and carry high proportion of total area travel on a minimum of mileage. 
B.  Major arterial. Streets which interconnect with the principal arterial system and provide service and land access and generally do not penetrate identifiable single-family residential neighborhoods. 
C.  Minor arterial. Intra-community continuity but should not penetrate identifiable neighborhoods. 
4.05.002. - Collector. 
A.  Collector streets. Distribute trips from arterial streets to their ultimate origin or destination. Collector streets provide a greater level of land access than arterial streets, may enter or traverse identifiable neighborhoods, and rarely serve significant volumes of through-traffic. 
B.  Local streets. Comprise all facilities not classified as arterial or collector. Local streets provide land access with service to through-traffic being actively discouraged. 
CHAPTER 4.06: - STORAGE AND PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, TRAILERS, AND OTHER VEHICLES 

4.06.001. - Storage and parking of recreational vehicle, trailers, and other vehicles. 
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling, and recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored on any lot or parcel in any zoning district except in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  No commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products is permitted in any residential zoning district. They may only be parked in C-2 or manufacturing zoning districts and no closer than 200 feet to a resident. 
B.  Recreational vehicles, hauling trailers rated less than 5,000 pounds, or boat trailers are permitted if parked or stored behind the front yard building line in any zoning district. 
C.  A recreational vehicle shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a recreational vehicle park authorized under this ordinance, or as otherwise stated in this ordinance. 
D.  In all residentially zoned districts, it is prohibited to park or store abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, salvage or scrap materials, power-driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material unless it is in an enclosed accessory building. In all residentially zoned areas, all junked or wrecked vehicles not located in a garage or carport must not be visible from the public right-of-way or by adjacent neighbors. These vehicles must be shielded by either planted and maintained plant materials or solid fencing. Auto covers or tarpaulins will not qualify as shielding materials. 
E.  No automobile, recreational vehicle, trailer, or other vehicle offered for sale shall be parked in the public right-of-way. 
F.  Commercial vehicles weighing greater than 10,000 pounds may be parked over night in residential areas under the following conditions: 
1.  Commercial vehicle must be owned by the owner of the residential address where the vehicle is parked. 
2.  A hard surface driveway of either asphalt or concrete must be provided from the street pavement edge to the private property line. 
3.  Spare parts, tires, and accessory item must be stored in an enclosed accessory building. 
4.  Once the above provisions are met and prior to October 1, 2002, owners may apply for and receive a permanent permit to continue parking their vehicles (including a replacement vehicle) over night on their property. Over night is defined as that period of time from sun-set to sun-rise. After October 1, 2002, no permit will be issued for the parking of commercial vehicles in any residential zoned district. 
CHAPTER 4.07: - BUFFER AREAS 

4.07.001. - Buffer areas. 
All required buffer areas and landscape strips are in addition to area, yard, and height requirements for the zoning district as specified in section 2.03.002. 
A.  In the commercial districts, any operation not conducted within a building, such as outdoor recreation, outdoor storage of materials, and outdoor servicing activities, shall be enclosed by a solid wall or solid fence or tight evergreen hedge not less than eight feet in height. The bottom of the fence must be no higher than four inches from the ground. The top of the fence must not evidence significant elevation changes (i.e. the top of the fence at the highest topographic elevation will determine the height of all portions of the fence, regardless of elevation changes). If constructed from wood, the fence height must be achieved by the installation of one continuous eight-foot, or greater, board. The zoning administrator shall, based on the character of the area, determine whether the applicant must install the solid wall, solid fence, or tight evergreen hedge. 
B.  In any zoning district not subject to the requirements of section 4.07 but requiring screening of a specified operation, said screening shall be a solid wall or solid fence or tight evergreen hedge not less than eight feet in height. The tight evergreen hedge shall grow to at least eight feet in height within five years. There shall be a perimeter landscape strip at least 20 feet wide, unless otherwise specified, that conforms to the planting requirements of section 4.08. All buffer area requirements are in addition to the area, yard, and height requirements for that zoning district (section 2.03.002). Prior to any site construction or grading, the zoning administrator must approve a landscaping plan prepared pursuant to section 4.08. 
C.  Any grading, improvement or construction adjacent to the buffer must not disturb or encroach on the buffer area. 
CHAPTER 4.08: - LANDSCAPING 
These standards for the landscaping of development within the city are intended to ensure the continued attractiveness and character of the city. The standards in this section shall apply to all public and private development, new construction, exterior remodeling, or enlargement of buildings and structures, unless otherwise specifically stated. 

4.08.001. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the standards of this section: 
A.  Agriculture structures and agricultural uses in the agricultural districts; 
B.  Minor improvements or repairs to existing development that do not result in an increase in floor area; major facade renovations may generate a landscaping requirement; 
C.  Detached single-family dwellings on individual lots, unless required to install landscaping as a condition of project approval; 
D.  Accessory dwelling units. 
4.08.002. - Required landscaping. 
Required landscaping shall be installed in all yard areas, along the perimeter of the lot, around buildings, and all other portions of the property not specifically utilized for driveways, parking, loading, or other functions for which landscaping may not be practical as determined by the zoning administrator. 
Landscaping shall be utilized for such purposes including, but not limited to: 
A.  Establishing a visual separation or screen of parking areas from the public right-of-way; 
B.  Providing a separation of pedestrian and service areas; 
C.  Providing a separation where the lot or parcel opposite of the boundary of the proposed development is a residentially zoned; 
D.  Providing a vertical transition from the grounds to the building; 
E.  Maintaining and enhancing natural drainage patterns; and 
F.  Maintaining the small town character of Commerce through the aesthetics of landscaping as Commerce continues to grow. 
4.08.003. - Landscaping rights-of-way. 
All public rights-of-way and private road rights-of-way or access easements shall provide a planted landscaped strip to city specifications. The species and size of street trees shall be approved by the zoning administrator. Plantings within the right-of-way may count towards meeting the landscape requirements of this chapter. 
4.08.004. - Landscaping for lots which are partially developed. 
At the discretion of the zoning administrator, projects with substantial portions of the parcel area left for future development may be exempt from landscaping the undeveloped portion of the property. If any portion of the undeveloped area of the lot fronts a public right-of-way, standard improvements such as curb, gutter, sidewalk, and installation of street trees and other appropriate landscaping shall be required at the time of development. 
4.08.005. - Landscaping when expansion or additional development occurs. 
If a parcel with existing development is proposed for additional development, the zoning administrator has the discretion to review the landscaping installed on the entire property and may require improvements to be installed or conformance with other provisions of this section. 
4.08.006. - Waiver of landscaping standards for small industrial and commercial lots. 
Waiver for a site being developed with commercial uses that is less than 20,000 square feet: In cases where required landscaping plant units, parking lot landscaping, and parking lot borders consume more than 20 percent of the proposed development site, the zoning administrator may exercise discretion regarding the width or location of landscape borders. In such cases, the developer may be required to add additional plant material to remaining landscape borders or elsewhere on the site in order to meet the purpose of this section. 
4.08.007. - Landscaping required for interior remodeling that results in a change of use. 
When a structure's use is changed to a use other than single-family and there is no change in exterior appearance, the applicant shall conform with the landscaping requirements of this chapter. 
4.08.008. - Landscaping objectives. 
Landscaping regulations are intended to provide for two options. If a property owner desires to create a landscaping plan that meets the needs of the individual project, the plan may be prepared pursuant to this section and is classified as a "performance" landscaping plan. If a property owner wishes to have the standards specified and identified in order to prepare a plan to city specifications, see section 4.08.009, Prescriptive Landscaping Standards. 
A.  Landscaping is a community enhancement. Landscaping is intended to enhance the aesthetics of development within the city. Each development has unique characteristics based on location, land use, or physical site features. Project proponents may utilize the performance standards in this section in preparing professional quality landscape plans for review and approval by the zoning administrator in association with overall site development. Proponents not desiring to utilize the flexibility and creative opportunities in this section shall utilize the prescribed standards of this section. 
B.  Landscaping performance objectives. In addition to the purposes of this chapter, performance landscape plans shall, as determined by the zoning administrator, meet the following objectives: 
1.  Provide a transitional landscape area between the public right-of-way and the parking areas: Landscaping shall be used to provide a screening of vehicles in a parking lot from the ground to approximately 36 to 42 inches. 
2.  Establish a separation and transition from parking to the building through a gradual increase in elevation of landscaping from the parking area to the building height: plant materials may be a mixture of heights and shapes but designed to bring an appearance of reducing the height of a structure when viewed from the road or neighboring properties, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
C.  Enhance or develop pedestrian-oriented spaces and creation of usable outdoor spaces. 
1.  Ensure that service areas are enclosed and landscaping utilized to transition from the parking area: Landscaping or decorative materials used to screen service areas in a combination of concepts, including and not limited to shrubs of similar height to the walls, the design of walls as planters, climbing vines, or other treatment that will break up the appearance of walls. 
2.  Provide a balance between the overall appearance of the landscaping as a part of a planned site and the buildings on the site. The city's objective is to ensure that the site has dense landscaping in terms of the land area dedicated to landscaping and in vertical elevation of landscaping. 
3.  Any flexibility to be applied by the zoning administrator shall be based on achieving an attractive site with installations of landscaping that are designed to complement and enhance the site development. 
D.  Submission of performance landscape plans. 
1.  Performance landscaping plans shall be of adequate size and detail so that the zoning administrator can see the land area to be planted and the appearance of plantings at the time of installation, at five years healthy growth, and at ten years healthy growth. 
2.  Performance landscaping site plans and elevations shall be drawn in a professional manner with credible representations of drip lines, plant growth diameters, and plant sizes. The zoning administrator shall not require that plans and elevations be prepared by a licensed professional, but the planning commission may reject plans which do not accurately depict the site landscaping proposal in suitable detail for it to make a decision. 
3.  Performance landscaping plans shall be accompanied by a planting schedule that identifies both the common and scientific name of each species. The schedule shall include the size at planting, the size a five years of growth, and ten years of growth if the proposed plants are different than the adopted plant schedule. 
E.  Review of performance landscape plans. 
1.  In reviewing proposed performance landscape plans, favorable consideration shall be given to exceptional landscape designs that preserve and incorporate existing vegetation and demonstrate innovative design and use of plant materials. Performance landscape plans may be approved upon a finding that the plan meets or exceeds the purposes and objective of this section thorough either: 
a.  Natural land characteristics or existing vegetation on the proposed development site; or 
b.  Innovative landscaping or architectural design. 
4.08.009. - Prescriptive landscaping standards. 
A.  Calculating plant units. Development must have the following minimum plant units: 
1.  For development within the residential zones: a minimum of 60 plant units is required for each dwelling unit. 
2.  For development within the commercial and industrial zones: a minimum of ten plant units for each 1,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross land area. 
3.  For development within the office-institutional zone: a minimum of 30 plant units for each 1,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross land area. 
B.  Plant unit values. 

 
C.  Bonus points. Bonus points may be earned towards the total landscaping requirement by using plants which fall into the following categories. Each plant unit is only subject to one bonus multiplier. 

 
4.08.010. - Landscape material standards. 
A.  Plants shall be nursery-grown and adapted to the local climate. 
B.  When more than ten trees are required to meet the standards of this chapter, a mix of species shall be planted. In order to promote diversity in the urban landscape, the minimum number of species to be planted shall vary according to the overall number of trees required. Street trees within the right-of-way are intended to be of a uniform species and are not subject to the provisions of this subsection. In addition to the diversity of species, the zoning administrator may require diversity of shapes and sizes as a part of the landscape plan. If a landscape proposal is submitted in which a cohesive element of the landscaping design proposes a uniform species as a part of a unique landscape plan, the zoning administrator may waive the species diversity requirement. 

 
C.  Groundcover. The ground area within required landscape areas shall have appropriate planted landscape treatment applied and present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage upon planting. 
D.  No artificial plants or artificial vegetation shall be used to meet any standards of this Chapter. 
4.08.011. - Installation, replacement, occupancy. 
A.  Accepted practices required. All landscaping shall be installed according to sound nursery practices in a manner designed to encourage vigorous and healthy growth. All landscape material, living and non-living, shall be in place prior to the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. Living materials shall be in a healthy condition. 
B.  Protection of existing trees during construction. Any trees identified or approved for preservation by the zoning administrator shall be protected utilizing accepted techniques for protection including and not limited to those shown in Figure 4.1. 
C.  Replacement of dead, diseased, or dying vegetation. The zoning administrator may require that landscaping be replaced in-kind if vegetation becomes dead, diseased, or dying. In the event of blight or species-specific diseases, substitution of plants shall be approved by the zoning administrator. 
D.  Temporary occupancy requirements. A certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to the installation of required landscaping upon execution of an agreement with the city and acceptance by the city of appropriate surety. 
1.  Land development that does not require or is normally utilized without obtaining a certificate of occupancy shall have landscaping installed per this section prior to the initiation of any use or any occupancy of the facility, structure, or grounds. 
2.  An agreement for temporary occupancy shall be used only under extenuating circumstances which prohibit the physical installation of landscaping at the time the certificate of occupancy is issued (drought, flooding, etc.). Financial or similar issues shall not constitute extenuating circumstances for the purposes of this section. 
3.  Financial surety shall be equal to 110 percent of the estimated cost of the plant material, labor, and installation, and other materials. 
a.  The amount of the surety shall be calculated from a written cost estimate prepared by an appropriately licensed professional and provided to the zoning administrator by the developer. If the zoning administrator finds that the cost estimates are not generally within accepted standards for estimating the costs of landscaping installation, the mayor shall require that surety be based on accepted estimating practices. 
b.  Each estimate shall be guaranteed valid at the maturity of the surety instrument. 
c.  An irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, certificate of deposit endorsed in favor of the city, performance bond issued by a bonding company with an investment grade rating by Moodys or Standard and Poors, or savings account passbook issued in favor of the city shall be acceptable forms of surety. 

Figure 4.1 Tree Protection Measures
4.  Automatic irrigation required. All landscaping installations shall be required to incorporate an automatic underground irrigation system. Irrigation system shall be approved by the zoning administrator. 
4.08.012. - Landscaping features are a part of the overall approval. 
Trees, shrubs, fences, walls and other landscape features depicted on plans approved by the city shall be considered as elements of the project in the same manner as parking, building materials, and other details are elements of the plan. The landowner, heirs, successors in interest, lessees, or agent, shall be jointly and severally responsible for installation, maintenance, and upkeep as specified. 
4.08.013. - Maintenance and upkeep of landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping to be maintained in a vigorous and healthy condition. 
1.  Regular maintenance of all landscaping to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance shall be required. 
2.  All landscaping shall be maintained free from disease, pests, weeds, and litter. 
3.  Maintenance shall include weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning, mowing, edging, mulching and other maintenance as needed and in accordance with acceptable horticultural practices. 
B.  Repair and replacement of landscaping. 
1.  Required landscape structures (examples include but are not limited to walls, fences, curbs, planters) shall be maintained in a structurally sound and aesthetically pleasing condition. 
2.  The regular maintenance, repair, or replacement of any landscaping irrigation systems is required. 
3.  Continuous maintenance of the site as a whole is required. 
4.  All trees, shrubs, groundcover, and other plant materials must be replaced during the next suitable planting period if they die or become unhealthy because of accidents, drainage problems, disease; or other causes. 
4.08.014. - Parking lot landscaping. 
Parking lot landscaping standards of this section establish minimum landscaping requirements for the perimeter and interior of off-street parking areas. The general purpose of such landscaping is to reduce the visual impact of parking and pavement. Parking lots should be effectively landscaped with trees and shrubs to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights, and parking lot lights from the public right-of-way and from adjoining properties. In addition, parking lots should be adequately shaded to reduce the amount of reflected heat. 
A.  Perimeter parking lot landscaping: The parking lot perimeter landscaping requirements apply to all off-street parking lots that are not otherwise fully screened from view of adjacent public right-of-way. When a lot is located adjacent to a public right-of-way, alternatives should be considered to reduce the visual impact of the parking lot. Some alternatives are: 
1.  Use of landscape perimeter borders: Required landscape borders shall be dedicated solely for open space and landscaping. No structures of paving shall be located within the border area, with the exception of walls, walkways or other features incorporated into the landscaping. 
2.  Perimeter landscape border options: Any of the following types of perimeter landscape border detailed in the below chart, may be used to satisfy parking lot border landscaping requirements of this section. 

 
2 Maximum distance: The greatest depth of the parking lot as measured from the front yard property line and the greatest width of the parking lot as measured from adjacent side yard property lines. 
3 Minimum width of the border: The minimum width of the border shall be in addition to the required setbacks. A parking perimeter border shall be required between the parking areas and the property line but will not apply between the parking area and interior structures or areas. 
4 Minimum number of plant units: The minimum number of plant units to be located within the parking perimeter border shall be in addition to the requirements for the square footage of the lot. The number of units shall be calculated based upon the perimeter of the parking area. 
5 Type A parking borders may be used on any parking lot. If the depth of the parking lot measured from the property line is more than 150 feet. Type A parking border shall be required. If the depth is from 100 to 150 feet, a Type A or Type B border is required. If the depth is less than 100 feet, Type A, B, C, or D border shall be required. The applicant may select the optional border. Depending on site design, a single site may have more than one landscape parking border type. 
6 Landscaping is required on the berm. 
7 On property line fronting a public or private road as required by the zoning administrator. Landscaping is required in between the wall and right-of-way. 
B.  Parking lot interior landscaping requirements. The parking lot interior landscaping requirements apply to the interior of all off-street parking lots that contain five or more parking spaces. Interior Planting Areas are required within all parking lots as specified in the subsection. 

Figure 4.2 parking lot landscaping options for separation from right-of-way
1.  At least ten square feet of landscape planting area shall be provided within the interior of all off-street parking area for each parking space contained with the area. For parking areas with more than 20 total parking stalls in a double-loaded aisle, a ten-foot wide landscaped island shall run the length of the aisle. This island shall be required for each such aisle. 
2.  Landscaping located on the interior of parking areas shall be dispersed throughout the area. All planting areas shall be protected to prevent damage by vehicles and vehicle overhang. 
3.  The size of planting areas used to satisfy parking lot interior landscaping requirements shall be sufficient to protect plant materials and ensure proper growth and maintenance. 
C.  Parking lot landscaping requirements when more than the maximum number of parking space is approved. 
1.  When the parking space in excess of the defined maximum in Chapter 4.02 is approved, the minimum interior lot landscaping requirements shall be increased to 12.5 square feet of landscaping for each parking space. 
2.  All aisles shall have landscaped areas at each end of the aisle. 
3.  Landscaped medians at least ten feet in width shall be required for aisles that align with street access. 
4.08.015. - Screening of service areas. 
A.  Waste disposal receptacles. 
1.  Waste disposal receptacle located in all commercial and government zones shall be completely screened from view on all sides by a fence or wall with a minimum height of six feet or one foot taller than the receptacle, whichever is greater. 
2.  The enclosure shall be compatible in material and color with the primary structure on the lot if located within 20 feet of the building. If located beyond 20 feet from any structure, the enclosure should be designed to minimize the visual impact and blend in with surrounding landscaping. 
3.  Waste disposal receptacles shall be consolidated to reasonably minimize the number of collection sites and to equalize the distance from the buildings they serve. 
a.  Waste disposal receptacles shall be located out of the public view insofar as is practical. 
b.  Waste disposal receptacles shall be located to avoid causing excessive nuisance or offense to other buildings or adjoining properties. 
B.  Loading docks, storage areas. Loading docks, storage of materials or vehicles, and other service areas shall be screened from public view. Screening may include plant materials, fencing, walls, or a combination as approved by the zoning administrator. 
4.08.016. - Landscaping in the public right-of-way between the edge of pavement and the property line. 
A.  Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining landscaping within the public right-of-way along the entire frontage of the property unless otherwise determined by the zoning administrator. 
B.  No conversion of right-of-way landscaping to any other use or surface material shall be permitted without the written permission of the zoning administrator. 
C.  Landscaping and any other surface material located within the right-of-way between the edge of the traveled way and the property shall not be used for the storage, sale, display, or merchandise. 
CHAPTER 4.09: - OUTDOOR LIGHTING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
(See Appendix A for Examples of Light Fixtures) 

4.09.001. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the proposed amendments is to provide more specific guidelines for site plan applications and standards in regard to lighting, in order to maximize the effectiveness of site lighting, to avoid unnecessary upward illumination and illumination of adjacent properties, and to reduce glare. 
4.09.002. - Applicability. 
Except as provided in section 4.09.005, this chapter shall apply to each outdoor luminary installed or replaced after the date of adoption of these regulations which is: 
A.  Located on property within a commercial or industrial zoning district and is equipped with a lamp which emits 3,000 or more initial lumens; or 
B.  Located on property within a residential zoning district or agricultural zoning district and is equipped with a high intensity discharge lamp, regardless of its initial lumens. 
4.09.003. - Standards. 
A.  All exterior lights and illuminated signs shall be designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to prevent objectionable light at, and glare across, the property lines and disability glare at any location on or off the property. The "maintained horizontal illuminance recommendations" set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North American shall be observed. 
B.  All parking area lighting will be full cut-off type fixtures. 
C.  Uplighting is prohibited. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward. The lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare and/or light trespass. The lighting must also be, as much as physically possible, contained to the target area. Internally lighted signs are acceptable, provided they meet the requirements of chapter 4.10. 
D.  All building lighting for security or aesthetics will be full cut-off or a shielded type, not allowing any upward distribution of light. Floodlighting is discouraged, and if used, must be shielded to prevent: 
1.  Disability glare for drivers or pedestrians. 
2.  Light trespass beyond the property line, and 
3.  Light above a 90 degree, horizontal plane. 
Wallpack type fixtures are not acceptable. 
E.  Adjacent to residential property, no direct light source will be visible at the property line at ground level or above. 
F.  All non-essential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security. Non-essential shall apply to display, aesthetic, parking and sign lighting. 
4.09.004. - Modification, waiver, or variation. 
A modification, waiver or variation from the standard set forth in section 4.09.003 may be granted by the zoning administrator, as provided herein: 
A.  The zoning administrator may modify, waive or vary the standard set forth in section 4.09.003 in a particular case, and impose conditions on such a modification, waiver or variation which it deems appropriate to further the purposes of these outdoor lighting regulations, in either of the following circumstances: 
1.  Upon finding that strict application of the standard would not forward the purposes of this chapter or otherwise serve the public interest, or that alternative proposed by the owner would satisfy the purposes of these outdoor lighting regulations at least to an equivalent degree. 
2.  Upon finding that an outdoor luminary, or system of outdoor luminaries, required for a baseball, softball, football or soccer field cannot reasonably comply with the standard and provide sufficient illumination of the field for its safe use, as determined by recommended practices adopted by the illuminating Engineering Society of North America for that type of field and activity or other evidence if a recommended practice is not applicable. 
4.09.005. - Exempt outdoor lighting and related acts. 
The following outdoor lighting and related acts shall be exempt from the requirements of these outdoor lighting regulations: 
A.  Lighting which is not subject to this chapter by state or federal law. 
B.  Construction, agricultural, emergency or holiday decorative lighting, provided that the lighting is temporary, and is discontinued within seven days upon completion of the project or holiday for which the lighting was provided. 
C.  Lighting of the United States of America flag, State of Georgia flag, and other non-commercial flags expressing constitutionally protected speech. 
D.  Security lighting controlled by sensors which provides illumination for 15 minutes or less. 
E.  The replacement of an inoperable lamp or component which is in a luminary that was installed prior to the date of adoption this chapter. 
F.  The replacement of a failed or damaged luminary which is one of a matching group serving a common purpose. 
CHAPTER 4.10: - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-008, adopted Aug. 10, 2009, deleted §§ 4.10.001—4.10-013 and enacted §§ 4.10.001—4.10.012 to read as set out herein. Former §§ 4.10.001—4.10.013 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 2007-006, adopted July 9, 2007. 

4.10.001. - Purpose and intent. 
101.  Purpose of sign regulation. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to support the economic vitality of the city through adequate identification of occupants, services, and events; to safeguard life through traffic safety; to protect the use of property, property values, and the public welfare; and to afford adequate opportunity for self-expression through free speech. These purposes are realized by regulating and controlling the number, location, size, sign type, and type of illumination of signs and sign structures so that all persons have ample opportunity to be equally heard and the public health, safety, and general welfare are adequately secured. 
B.  Regulation of the location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the city, to take advantage of the beauty of the city's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Such regulation is also necessary to facilitate and aid in the identification and location of businesses in the city in the event of police, fire, or other emergencies and to avoid confusion and delay in response to such emergencies. Accordingly, it is the intention of the city to establish regulations governing the display of signs that will foster these objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Provide a reasonable balance between the right of a person to convey his or her message and the right of the public to be protected against the visual discord resulting from the unrestricted proliferation of signs and advertising devices; 
2.  Guard against an excess of large, aesthetically unappealing, intense signs which cause visual blight on the appearance of the community. Visual blight adversely affects the aesthetic quality of life and traffic safety in the community for residents, businesses, pedestrians, and persons in vehicles; 
3.  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare while protecting the rights of sign owners to expression; 
4.  Provide regulations that vary the sign area based on the type of land use and zoning district, and based on need which is determined in part by the type of road frontage to which signage is directed; 
5.  Provide regulations which are content-neutral. It is not the intent to regulate the content of messages in any way. To accomplish this, these regulations do not distinguish between on-site or off-site sign content, nor do they distinguish between commercial and noncommercial content. Any sign permitted pursuant to this chapter may contain commercial or noncommercial content. Sign allowances in this chapter take into account the needs for off-premises signs and signs carrying messages of a noncommercial character; 
6.  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by unregulated or inadequately regulated signs; 
7.  Ensure that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with the total visual environment of the community; 
8.  Eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays; and 
9.  Preserve and improve the appearance of the community as a place in which to live and to work and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade. 
102.  Regulation of signs. Signs erected within the city shall meet the placement and physical standards established by this chapter. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all properties, regardless of zoning district. 
103.  Intent of sign regulations. Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this sign ordinance, any sign authorized under this chapter can contain any message, other than messages containing obscenity, or other than a sign that advertises an activity that is illegal under Georgia or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 1, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
4.10.002. - Definitions. 
201.  Zoning categories. The zoning categories listed herein are defined in the City of Commerce Zoning Ordinance. 
202.  Definitions of words and phrases. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them. 
Abandoned sign: A permanent principal use sign on property containing a building or activity that has ceased operations. Permanent principal use signs on property shall be considered abandoned when there is clear evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds; provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to any case where a business or activity is temporarily suspended and there is evidence that the business or activity will resume operations within a six-month period. 
Animated sign: A sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors which accomplishes such action, motion, sound, or changing colors with or without electrical energy. This includes signs with lights or other illuminating devices that blink, flash, fluctuate, or have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color. This definition does not include a "swinging sign" or "multiple message sign" as defined by this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the transition of a message on an electronic multiple message sign shall not be considered "animation." 
Area of sign: The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the message or used to differentiate such writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character from the background against which it is placed. The area of sign includes the term "sign face." 

SIGN AREA MEASUREMENT 
For double-faced signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area, or only one face shall be measured in computing sign area if the display faces are the same size. The display of street address on a ground sign, wall, or window shall not be computed in determining the maximum allowable area of a ground, wall, or window sign. 
Awning: An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either permanent or retractable. 
Awning sign: An awning that contains letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, logos, or visual display, or other communication, attached, painted on, or made an integral part of an awning. For purposes of this chapter, "awning signs" shall be considered "wall signs." 
Banner: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this chapter, the term "banner" includes the term "pennant." 
Building marker: Any sign cut into a masonry surface of a building or made of bronze or other permanent material and permanently affixed to a building. 
Building sign: A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door, or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
A.  Mansard sign: A sign imposed, mounted or painted upon a mansard and not extending above the top of the mansard. 
B.  Parapet sign: A sign imposed, mounted or painted on a parapet and not extending above the top of the parapet. 
C.  Under-canopy sign: A display attached to the underside of a marquee, awning or canopy and protruding over public or private sidewalks. 
D.  Wall sign: A single-sided sign with one visible face applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which if attached to a wall or portico and does not project more than 12 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure, or if on an awning or canopy, is flush with the material of said awning or canopy (see also figure, "types of attached signs"). 
Canopy, attached: A multisided structure or architectural projection supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides and also supported by columns at additional points. Signs placed on attached canopies are considered "wall signs" for the purposes of this chapter. 
Canopy, freestanding: A multisided structure or architectural projection supported by columns. Signs placed on freestanding canopies are considered "wall signs" for the purposes of this chapter. 
Canopy sign: A sign on a canopy. For purposes of this chapter, a sign on a canopy is a "wall sign" (see figure, "types of attached signs"). 

TYPES OF ATTACHED SIGNS 
Channeled letters: 
A.  Internally channeled letters: Letters or other symbols with recessed surface designed to accommodate incandescent bulbs or luminous tubing. 
B.  Reverse channeled letters: Letters or other symbols with raised surface designed to be lighted from behind by incandescent bulbs or luminous tubing. 
Code enforcement: The Commerce City Code Enforcement Department. 
Code enforcement director: The director of the Commerce City Code Enforcement Department or the code enforcement director's designee. 
Code enforcement officer: An officer of the Commerce City Code Enforcement Department. The term "officer" shall include the code enforcement director. 
Dissolve: A mode of message transition on an electronic multiple message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the subsequent message. 
Double-faced sign: A sign which has two display areas against each other or where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. Sign faces on a single sign structure that are separated by more than three feet are treated as separate signs. Only one face shall be used in computing allowable sign area. 
Erect: To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish, but it shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change of the sign copy or the normal maintenance or repair of a sign structure. 
Externally Illuminated Sign: A sign illuminated by an external source. 
Fade: A mode of message transition on an electronic multiple message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
Flag: Fabric containing colors, patterns or symbols used as the symbol of a government or other entity or organization or concept. 
Freestanding sign: A sign permanently attached to the ground and that is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The term "freestanding sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
A.  Pole sign: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. Pole sign includes the term "interstate sign." 
B.  Ground sign: A sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. A ground sign may consist of more than one sign panel; provided all such sign panels are attached to or integrated into one sign structure. 
C.  Monument sign: A sign where the structural part of the sign below the sign face encompasses an area at least 40 percent of the area of the sign face but no more than 1.5 times the area of the sign face, and which is composed of brick, stone, or other similar material. 
Frontage, building: The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular building in which an establishment is located. 
Frontage, road: The distance in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Height of sign: The distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign, whether that highest point is the frame of the sign face or panel or the support of the sign. 
Holiday decorations: Displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance of religious, national, or state holidays, which are not intended to be permanent. 
Inflatable sign: Any sign that is or can be filled with three cubic feet or more of air or gas. 
Internally illuminated sign: A sign illuminated by an internal light source which is viewed through a translucent panel. 
Incidental sign: A small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than one square foot. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way. 
Marquee: A roof like structure attached to and supported by a building wall (with no vertical supports) and that projects in a cantilever fashion from the wall of a building. 
Marquee sign: A sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a marquee. For purposes of this chapter, "marquee signs" shall be considered "wall signs." 
Master signage plan: A plan establishing parameters for the size, location, design, and color of signs on a property which contains multiple uses, buildings, or tenants but which is constructed or managed as a single development. 
Minimum street-side setback: The minimum distance required by the zoning on a property between an adjoining right-of-way and the facade of a principal building on the property. 
Multi-faced sign: A single sign structure consisting of two sign faces (see "double-faced sign) or three or more sign faces that are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. Sign faces on a single sign structure that are separated by more than three feet are treated as separate signs. 
Multiple message sign: A sign, display, or device which changes the message or copy on the sign. Such a change of message or copy can be accomplished electronically, or by movement or rotation of panels or slats, or by changing the copy by manual means. 
Multiple message sign, electronic: Any "sign," as defined in this chapter, which results in the illuminated display of messages or information by the use of a matrix of electric lamps (e.g., digital, LED (light emitting diode) or similar or refined display technology), or other electric methods, which allows the message change to be actuated by an electronic control mechanism. It is characteristic of such signs that the sequence of messages and the rate of change can be electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. Electronic multiple message signs are also "internally illuminated signs. 
Nit: A standard unit of luminance; a measurement of direct light (i.e., looking directly at the light source), used to describe displays. A "nit" is an amount of emanating light equal to one candela per square meter (cd/m2). 
Nonconforming sign: Any sign which lawfully existed on the effective date of this chapter but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or which does not comply with this chapter due to amendments to this chapter since the date of erection of the sign. 
Pennant: A small, triangular or rectangular banner, or multiples thereof, made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, individually supported or attached to each other by means of a string, rope, or other material and meant to be stretched across or fastened to buildings, or between poles and/or structures, and which is designed to move in the wind. For purposes of this chapter, "pennants" are "signs." 
Portable sign: Any sign whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols (i.e., a changeable copy sign). Even if the wheels or supports of such sign are removed and the sign [is] converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, said sign shall remain a portable sign. The term "portable sign" shall include the term "temporary sign." 
Portico: A porch or walkway, open to the outside air that is covered by a roof supported by columns or pillars, typically leading to the entrance of a building. Signs attached to porticos are considered "wall signs" for purposes of this chapter. 
Principal use sign: The primary freestanding and/or building sign allocated to a particular premises or lot. The owner of the principal use sign may display a message, the content of which is not regulated by this chapter. 
Project entrance sign: A freestanding monument sign erected at the entrance to a subdivision designed for residences, offices, businesses, institutions, or light industries or combination thereof. 
Projecting sign: A sign projecting more than 14 inches from the outside wall or walls of any building, or canopy, portico, or awning, upon which it is located (see also figure, "types of attached signs"). 
Roof sign: A sign projecting higher than the front building wall or any sign supported by or attached to said roof. 

Source: United States Sign Council. 2001. Guideline Code for Regulation of On-Premise Signs. 
Sign: A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bring to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way, a driveway or parking lot with access to a public right-of-way, or from an adjacent property, except as specifically noted otherwise in this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" includes but is not limited to "banners," "balloons," "flags," "pennants," "streamers" and "windblown devices." Furthermore, the term "sign" includes the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to draw the attention of the observers. 
Sign face: That part of a sign that is or can be used for the sign's message. 
Signable area: In the case of a wall sign, signable area shall be the building face on which the sign is proposed, excluding windows and doors. In the case of marquees or canopies, signable area shall be the area of the marquee or canopy wall on which the sign is proposed. For window signs, signable area shall be measured and calculated on the basis of the proportion of area within each individual window frame, not the total window area of all building windows visible from a street. 
Shared sign: A sign which is allowed on a premise with more than one tenant or occupants of a building and available for use by those tenants or occupants. It may be freestanding or attached (wall). 
Standard informational sign: A standard informational sign is a nonpermanent sign that is no larger than four and one-half (4½) square feet in area and three feet in height. 
Streamers: See "pennants." 
Swinging sign: A sign other than an animated sign as defined by this chapter, where the sign copy area is attached to a sign structure in a way that can be set in motion with pressure, and where the sign structure is attached to a building at a height above normal eye level. This term does not include any freestanding signs. A swinging sign may be considered in lieu of permitted wall signage. 
Temporary sign: A sign of a nonpermanent nature and erected for a limited duration. Temporary signs include, but are not limited to, flags in quantities of more than three, pennants, banners attached to structures, fringe, twirling, balloons, streamers, portable signs, air- or gas-filled figures, and other similar temporary signs. 
Transition: A visual effect used on an electronic multiple message sign to change one message to another. 
Visible: Capable of being seen (whether or not legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
Vehicular sign: Any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public right(s)-of-way except that this definition shall not apply when: 
A.  Such conveyances are actively being used to transport persons, goods or services in the normal course of business; 
B.  When such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area; or 
C.  When such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with a bona fide construction project for which building and other applicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway and provided said conveyances are located within designated storage areas. 
Windblown device: Any device not otherwise specifically defined in this chapter, that is designed to inform or attract, whether or not such device carries a message, and which all or part of the device is set in motion by wind. For purposes of this chapter, "windblown devices" are "signs." 
Window sign: A sign installed on or within two feet of an exterior window or door and intended to be visible from the exterior of the building. (See also figure, "types of attached signs".) 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 2, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
4.10.003. - Applicability. 
301.  Signs that are regulated. The regulations and requirements of this chapter apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a street or public right-of-way or adjacent property, or that are intended to be viewed from outdoor areas of public property. 
302.  Signs that are exempt from regulation. Each of the following types of signs are allowed on any property, with permission of the land owner, and are exempt from permitting requirements, provided they otherwise meet the standards of this chapter: 
A.  Flags, as many as three per lot, when designed and displayed in a way that allows for routine, daily removal or raising and lowering of the flags, not exceeding 40 square feet. Poles for such flags shall not exceed 25 feet in height, and shall not be more than 25 feet from the main building entrance; 
B.  Street address identifiers and building identification numbers on multitenant buildings no more than six inches in height in residential zoning districts and no more than twelve inches in height in all other zoning districts; 
C.  Signs not oriented or intended to be legible from a public right-of-way, private road or driveway, or adjacent property; 
D.  Signs which are designed to be read only from close range (i.e., five feet), attached to a device or structure more than 25 feet from the right-of-way of a road, not to exceed one square foot in area; provided, however, that drive-through lanes may have display boards not exceeding six feet in height or 36 square feet in area; 
E.  Signs erected more than two feet inside a building; 
F.  Building markers no greater than six square feet in area; 
G.  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs, installed within the right-of-way of a public street under the authority of the government with jurisdiction and meeting the standards of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
H.  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs along private streets and driveways, and in off-street parking lots that are installed per the requirements of the city planning director and which do not exceed four square feet each; 
I.  Shared signs, as defined by this chapter, which do not exceed four square feet each nor six feet in height; 
J.  Signs erected by or on the order of a governmental entity or a public officer in the performance of his duty; 
K.  Handicapped parking signs, when required per state law; 
L.  An A-frame or sandwich board sign. These signs may be placed in any commercial or CBD district provided that (1) the sign does not exceed six square feet per side (12 square feet total) of sign structure area; (2) the sign is only placed outside during business hours; (3) the sign is placed within three feet of the primary entrance to the owner's building; and (4) the sign is not placed in a manner or location such that an adequate portion of the sidewalk remains unobstructed for pedestrian traffic. Any A-frame or sandwich board sign that does not meet this criterion must be permitted; 
M.  Incidental signs. Small signs and postings as defined in this chapter of no more than one square foot, provided that the aggregate of all such signs on a property may not exceed 12 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 3, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
4.10.004. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited: 
401.  Attached and painted signs. Signs attached to trees or utility poles or boxes; signs painted on or otherwise attached to rocks or other natural objects; signs, other than those placed by a local, state or federal government, located within the public street right-of-way or within ten feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing are not allowed. 
402.  Dilapidated signs. Signs that are dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard, nuisance or to be unsafe or fail to comply with any provision of the building code of the city are not allowed. 
403.  Signs within the right-of-way. Signs attached to traffic signs, governmental signs, public rights-of-way or other public property, utility poles, or guy wires are not allowed; except for those signs erected with permission of the governing body with jurisdiction for a public purpose. 
404.  Festoons. Strings of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, or other devices or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic or other pliable material designed to move in the wind, are not allowed, except as provided for temporary signage under this chapter. 
405.  Obscene signs. Obscene signs, as defined by the State of Georgia at O.C.G.A. Section 16-12-80 (b), are not allowed. 
406.  Obstructions: 
A.  No sign shall obstruct any of the following: any fire escape, window, door, or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; 
B.  No sign shall extend above a parapet wall, be affixed to a fire escape, or interfere with any opening required for ventilation; 
C.  No sign shall be placed in such a manner that it obstructs the vision of pedestrians or traffic in a public right-of-way or the entrance of a private street or driveway to a public right-of-way; 
D.  No sign shall be located so as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic control sign, signal, or device. 
408.  Portable signs. A sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not permanently attached to the ground, such as, but not limited to, the following, is not allowed, except as provided for temporary signage under this chapter: 
A.  A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise affixed to it. 
B.  A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels. 
C.  Umbrellas except those hand held by persons or utilized for shade in an outdoor dining area. 
D.  Signs displayed on benches. 
E.  Signs displayed on trashcans. 
408.  Roof signs. Roof signs, including signs painted or adhered on roofs, are not allowed. This prohibition does not apply to the fascia portion of a mansard roof, or to the face of a parapet wall, provided that the sign must not extend above the top of the mansard roof or parapet wall. 
409.  Signs imitating warning signals. Signs displaying lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles or signs using words, slogans, dimensional shape or size, or colors of governmental traffic signs are not allowed. 
410.  Sound or smoke emitting signs. A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing, or a sign that emits smoke, vapor or odors, is not allowed. 
411.  Signs advertising illegal activity. Signs that advertise an activity illegal under Georgia or federal law are not allowed. 
412.  Signs placed on unlicensed motor vehicles. Any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a unlicensed motor vehicle, freight, flat-bed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public right(s)-of-way is not allowed. 
413.  Inflatable Signs. Inflatable signs, except as specifically permitted as a special event sign are not allowed. 
414.  Signs not allowed by property owner. Signs erected without the permission of the property owner are not allowed. 
415.  Vehicular signs. Vehicular signs are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 4, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
4.10.005. - General requirements applying to all signs. 
501.  Conformance to building codes. 
A.  In addition to any sign permit required under this chapter, a building permit shall be obtained from the city planning director prior to installation or placement of any freestanding sign having a sign structure area greater than 15 square feet or any building sign having a sign face area greater than six square feet. All signs for which a building permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all building code and electrical code requirements. 
B.  For any freestanding sign with a sign face greater than 240 square feet in area, plans for the sign shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the building code by a qualified structural engineer or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the building code. 
C.  All signs involving internal lights or other electrical devices or circuits shall display a label certifying it as being approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. All electrical service to a sign shall be in compliance with the electrical code. Clearance from all electrical power lines shall be in conformance with the requirements of the electrical code. 
502.  Conformance to state law. The following applies to any sign located or to be located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of a U.S. or State-numbered highway (or any other road designated as a "primary highway" by the State of Georgia and approved by the U.S. Department of Transportation), or located or to be located beyond 660 feet of such highway but visible and intended to be read from such highway: 
A.  Such sign shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Act, O.C.G.A. 32-6-70 et seq. 
B.  Such sign shall comply with all requirements of this chapter. Between the Georgia and Commerce City regulations, such sign must comply with the most restrictive requirements with respect to each and every item of regulation. 
503.  Sign maintenance. All signs shall be maintained by the sign owner in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. Upon discovery of a sign in need of maintenance, a code enforcement officer shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the property on which the sign is located if the owner of the sign itself cannot be determined. Said notice shall state the item or items requiring repair or maintenance. The owner shall have 30 days in which to repair or maintain the sign before a citation is issued. If the owner has failed to make repairs or the necessary maintenance within that time, a code enforcement officer shall cause a citation to be issued. A code enforcement officer may cause to be removed after notice pursuant to this section any sign which shows gross neglect, is dilapidated or poses an imminent threat to public safety. It shall be unlawful, after being notified pursuant to this section and after the 30 day notice has expired, for any person to display a sign in any of the following conditions: 
A.  Lettering or other elements of the sign have become detached or have fallen off the sign or become misaligned; 
B.  Painted surfaces on the sign or sign structure have begun to peel, flake over a significant portion of the sign, or have faded or oxidized to an extent that the sign no longer displays the message as originally intended; 
C.  A significant number of the bricks, stones, or other materials on the structural base of a sign have become detached or have fallen off, or have become misaligned; 
D.  For lighted signs, one or more illumination devices are not working and have not been replaced; 
E.  All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors that are not kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, covered by a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition; 
F.  Signs displaying visible rust; 
G.  Any sign not maintained in accordance with all applicable City regulations, including any regulations concerning nuisances and vegetation. 
504.  Minimum sign setback. 
A.  No sign or sign structure of any kind is authorized to extend into or above, or be anchored or placed in any portion of a public right-of-way (except signs erected by local, state or federal governments). 
B.  No sign on a property shall be located in the public right-of-way, and in any event will be no less than ten feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. 
505.  Principal freestanding signs; distance between. 
A.  Signs 100 square feet in area or less. Each principal freestanding sign having a sign face area of 100 square feet or less shall be located at least 50 feet from any other principal freestanding sign on the same side of the street. This distance may be reduced due to the location of existing signs on separate but adjoining lots but such reduction shall be the minimum required in order to maintain the greatest separation possible from such existing signs. Distance measurements are to be made horizontally from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
B.  Signs from 100 square feet to 240 square feet in area. Each principal freestanding sign having a sign face area from 100 square feet to 240 square feet shall be located at least 500 feet from any other freestanding sign, on the same side of the street, having a sign face area from 100 square feet to 240 square feet, and at least 200 feet in any direction from a property where signs having a sign face area of at least 100 square feet are not allowed. Distance measurements are to be made horizontally from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
C.  Signs greater than 240 square feet in area. Each principal freestanding sign having a sign face area greater than 240 square feet shall be located at least 750 feet from any other freestanding sign, on the same side of the street, having a sign face area greater than 240 square feet, and at least 200 feet from a property where signs having a sign face area of greater than 100 square feet are not allowed. Distance measurements are to be made horizontally from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
506.  Ground clearance under signs. 
A.  Projecting signs shall not project more than three feet beyond the face of the building. Projecting signs shall provide a minimum of eight feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign. 
B.  Under-canopy signs of greater than four square feet shall be rigidly mounted, and there shall be eight feet of clearance below the base of any rigidly mounted under-canopy sign. There shall be a minimum clearance of eight feet below the base of any non-rigidly mounted under-canopy sign. 
C.  Awning, mansard and marquee signs shall be no less than eight feet above the ground at the lowest extremity of the sign when erected over pedestrian walkways. 
507.  Visibility clearance area. 
A.  No portion of a sign face, and no portion of a sign structure wider than 12 inches, between the heights of three feet and 15 feet shall be located within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads, or within 20 feet of the intersection of a street right-of-way and either edge of a driveway. 
508.  Illuminated signs. 
A.  Where restricted. Signs are allowed to be externally or internally illuminated, except as follows: 
1.  A sign located on an agricultural property may not be internally illuminated. External illumination must be installed so that it illuminates only the sign face and does not shine onto public rights-of-way or neighboring properties. The source of the external illumination shall be shielded from view from public rights-of-way and neighboring properties. 
2.  A sign located on single- or two-family residential property may not be internally illuminated. External illumination must be installed so that it illuminates only the sign face and does not shine onto public rights-of-way or neighboring properties. The source of the external illumination shall be shielded from view from public rights-of-way and neighboring properties. 
3.  Temporary signs allowed under section 4.10.008 shall not be illuminated. 
4.  Signs located in the city central business district shall not have internal illumination. 
B.  Traffic control. No sign illumination device shall resemble an official traffic control sign, signal or device. 
C.  Hazards. Illumination devices shall be placed, filtered, and shielded so direct rays will not be cast into the eyes of drivers or pedestrians. 
D.  Light pollution. Sign illumination shall not cast light directly upon adjacent properties or roadways. 
E.  Neon tubes. No sign that has exposed neon tubes or other exposed tubes containing luminescent gas shall be used outside a building. 
F.  Exposed wires. All wiring must meet city building and electrical code requirements. 
G.  Strings of bulbs. Strings of bulbs are not permitted, except as part of a holiday decoration. 
H.  Types of illumination. 
1.  Externally-illuminated sign. An externally-illuminated sign, when permitted, shall have concealed wiring and controls, and shall have shielded and screened external light sources. 
2.  Internally-illuminated sign. Internally-illuminated signs, where permitted, must completely shield the source of light from direct view. Internally illuminated channeled or reverse-channeled letters are permitted only in instances of wall signs affixed to a building. 
I.  Multiple message signs. A multiple message sign shall not allow the display or message to change more frequently than once every ten seconds. The display or message shall not scroll or fade and must change instantaneously. 
509.  Abandoned signs. 
A.  If the principal use or activity on a property has ceased operation, any permanent ground signs, including supports, and wall signs, permitted in connection with said principal use or activity shall be removed within 90 days of the discontinuance of said principal use or activity. No new sign shall be permitted to be erected on the same property until the discontinued sign, including its supports, has been removed or is converted to a lawfully conforming sign. 
B.  If an accessory use or activity on a property has ceased operation, any permanent ground signs, including supports, and wall signs permitted in connection with said accessory use or activity shall be removed within 45 days of the discontinuance of said accessory use or activity. No new sign shall be permitted to be erected on the same property until the discontinued sign including supports has been removed or is converted to a lawfully conforming sign. Upon the expiration of the applicable time period provided in this section for the removal of discontinued signs and sign supports, said signs shall be deemed unlawful abandoned signs. 
C.  If a discontinued use sign contains a sign face that is in the form of a removable panel, the panel containing messaging shall be removed and replaced with a panel without messaging until another sign permit issued for a new use sign. If a discontinued use sign contains a sign copy area that is not removable without disassembling the sign, then the said sign copy area shall be painted over if possible, or, where it cannot be painted over, covered with durable cloth or canvas so that the sign copy area is no longer visible, until such time as a new sign permit is applied for and granted and new sign copy is placed on the existing panel or structure. 
510.  Nonconforming Signs. 
A.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign. 
B.  Nonconforming signs shall not be modified to add additional lighting or to be altered in any way. 
C.  A nonconforming sign that is a multiple message sign but the messages are changeable only by manual means may continue to have its copy changed by manual means. 
D.  A nonconforming sign that is a multiple message sign but the messages are changeable by means of the movement or rotation of panels or slats may continue to have its copy changed, and change copy, by any such same means. 
E.  A nonconforming sign that does not meet the definition of a "multiple message sign, electronic" as defined in this chapter shall not be changed, modified, or retrofitted in any way so as to become a "multiple message sign, electronic." 
F.  No structural repairs, change in shape, or size of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
G.  When a nonconforming sign is damaged by nature or an act of God, such sign may be promptly repaired, rebuilt or restored to the same dimensions, type, shape, location, size and height as the original nonconforming sign. The failure to repair, rebuild or restore such a sign within 180 days of the date of damage shall be deemed to be abandonment of the sign and any re-erection of such sign shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 5, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
4.10.006. - Measurement of sign area and height. 
601.  Computation of sign area. In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this chapter, the following shall establish how sign areas are measured. The terms "sign area" and "sign face area" are interchangeable and have the same meaning for the purpose of regulating maximum sign sizes. 
A.  Sign face area (See Figure 4). 
1.  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
2.  For signs that have no identifiable frame or border, the smallest rectangle that includes all of the sign's words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements intended to convey the sign's message shall establish the area of the sign's face (See Figure 6). 
3.  For signs applied to a kiosk or other cylindrical sign structure, the area of the sign face shall be computed as the largest rectangular area achieved from any one view of the sign. Measurements shall be made as a flat plane rectangle projected on the sign (See Figure 7). 
4.  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign module. 
5.  Manual changeable copy signs. For any sign on which any of the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are routinely changed or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
B.  Sign structure area (See Figure 5). 
1.  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face but are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
2.  For a kiosk or other cylindrical sign structure, the area of the sign structure shall be the largest measurement achieved from any view of the sign structure. Measurements shall be made as a flat plane rectangle projected on or bisecting the sign structure. 
3.  For project entrance signs or other signs that are imposed, mounted or painted on a wall or other decorative structure, the sign structure area shall be computed as that portion of such wall or other decorative structure that is discernibly devoted to the support of the sign or, by its design or architectural treatment, intended to provide a background or frame for the sign. 
C.  Treatment of oven spaces. Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face, sign module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face, sign module, or sign structure. 
D.  Multi-faced signs. 
1.  Double-faced signs. For double-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the smallest angle formed between the two faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For double-faced signs where the interior angle formed by the faces is more than 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be the total area of all sides. 
2.  Signs with three or more faces. For sign structures having only three faces and the interior angle formed between all of the faces is 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs with three or more sides, the area of the sign shall be the largest total of all faces that are joined by an interior angle of more than 60 degrees that can be viewed from any one direction. 
602.  Measurement of sign height. The height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the sign, or from the crown of the roadway of the nearest street within 50 feet of any portion of the sign, to the highest point of any portion of the sign, whichever results in the greater sign height. Any earthen berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, sign posts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 6, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 4.10.007. - Sign types permitted by zoning. 
The following sections present the maximum number, size, height, and other restrictions relating to specific signage that are permitted by right in each land use category. Additional signage is permitted under section 4.10.008, Temporary Signs, of this chapter. 
701.  Principal freestanding sign—One use on property. "Principal freestanding sign—One use on property" on Table 1 applies to a lot where there is only one use being made of the property, such as but not limited to one single-family or two-family dwelling, one multi-family development, one public or community institution, or one business occupant. A predominantly agricultural property, with or without a residence on the property, is considered a single agricultural use. Properties that are vacant but zoned or offered for sale or lease for a particular land use also fall under this category. 
See Table 1 
702.  Principal freestanding sign—Planned center. "Principal freestanding sign—Planned center" on Table 1 applies to a single commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately-owned and have no corporate relationship. A planned center may consist of several businesses in a single building or individual businesses in several buildings on the property. 
703.  Project entrance signs. Each project entrance sign shall not exceed the number, area or height limitations shown on Table 1. 
704.  Maximum number of principal freestanding signs. Only one principal freestanding sign is allowed on each parcel, whether the sign is located on a property occupied by only one use, is a planned center sign or is a project entrance sign. 4.10.007.705. Building signs. For building signs permitted on Table 2, the following shall apply: 
705.  Building signs. For building signs permitted on Table 2, the following shall apply: 
A.  For buildings, the maximum allowed area for a building sign on a wall shall be calculated on the basis of the percentage of the entire area of said wall, including all windows and doors. 
B.  In no case shall a window sign obscure more than 25 percent of a window. 

 
1 On a lot in a commercial subdivision, office or industrial park, the maximum sign height is 70 feet adjacent to the lot frontage on an Interstate or 4-Lane U.S. or State numbered highway, 25 feet along other U.S. or State numbered highway and 15 feet along all other streets/roads. 
2 These developments may have project entrance signs at a maximum of two entrances per project street front. For these developments, project entrance signs may be either single sign or dual sign structures, each type counting as one sign under "Max. Number" on the table. 
3 For these developments, project entrance signs may only be single sign project entrance signs. 

 
4 In a Commercial or Industrial district, for a tenant occupying 50,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area, the maximum sign area is 150 square feet, and for a tenant occupying more than 100,000 square feet of floor area, the maximum sign area is 200 square feet. 
5 In the Central Business District, for a tenant occupying 25,000 to 50,000 square feet of floor area, the maximum sign area is 150 square feet, and for a tenant occupying more than 50,000 square feet of floor area, the maximum sign area is 200 square feet. 
706.  Residential signs. In residential zoning districts a lot may contain no more than five standard informational signs with a maximum aggregate sign face area of twenty two and one-half (22.5) square feet without a permit or fee. A lot may contain one banner without a permit or fee but the sign face area of the banner shall be included in the maximum aggregate sign face area. No sign shall exceed three (3) feet in height. For those lots with conditional uses existing within residential zoning districts, one additional permanent freestanding sign not exceeding sixteen (16) feet in sign area and six feet in height may be erected. 
707.  Outdoor recreational facility. Signs erected on walls, fences, dugouts, press boxes, stadium stands, concession stands, ticket booths, benches and locker rooms on any public or community use outdoor recreational facility (such as a baseball stadium or soccer field) are permitted with the following restrictions: 
A.  Each individual sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and 32 square feet in area and must face inward to the recreational activity area. 
B.  There shall be no limit on the number of signs per site provided that such sign faces are not visible from neighboring residential property or public rights-of-way. 
708.  Flags. 
A.  Number and size of flags. 
1.  No more than three flags may be displayed on a lot in a residential zoning district without a permit. 
2.  In non-residential zoning districts, no more than three flags may be displayed on a lot without a permit. 
3.  For any flag larger than 40 square feet, engineering drawings for the proposed supporting structure shall be submitted to the code enforcement director for review prior to construction. 
4.  Flags shall not be located in the public right-of-way, and in any event will be no less than ten feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. 
709.  Automatic changeable copy signs/Animated and flashing signs. Automatic changeable copy signs and animated and flashing signs are only allowed on commercial and industrial zoned properties, but must comply with regulations contained in Section 4.10.005.508. 
710.  Interstate signs. In addition to those signs shown on Table 1, freestanding signs are allowed along Interstate Highway 85 and U.S. Highway 441 under the following provisions: 
A.  Each freestanding sign located within 660 feet of Interstate Highway 85 or U.S. Highway 441 and within an area 1,500 feet long from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp shall be termed an "interstate sign." Interstate signs must be within an area zoned under the city commercial or industrial zoning districts. 
B.  Three interstate signs are allowed per quadrant of any interchange adjacent to Interstate Highway 85. 
C.  The maximum outside measurements of all interstate signs shall be 14 feet in height and 48 feet in length, with or without trim. 
D.  All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights is prohibited. 
E.  All interstate signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Pole signs shall not exceed 70 feet in height and all other types shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
F.  Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons are prohibited. 
G.  Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back to back or V formation signs but prohibits two signs (side by side) facing the same direction. 
H.  Sign locations shall be no less than 1,000 feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
I.  Sign structures shall be located no less than twelve feet from any property line or right or way line or the distance required by this chapter or any other City of Commerce ordinance, whichever is greater. 
J.  No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of an area designated by local, state or federal agency as historic. 
K.  All portions of the face and support members of any interstate sign shall be setback from all buildings and structures by at least 75 feet. 
711.  Vacant and undeveloped property. Any property which is not occupied on a regular basis and any property which is not developed property may contain only one sign authorized by this section. Such property that is also located within the CBD district shall also comply with the requirements for that district. Vacant and undeveloped properties shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Freestanding signs. Such property may contain one freestanding sign in accordance with the following: 
1.  Number of signs. One freestanding sign limited to 32 square feet of sign face area provided that their support members shall not be located in the public right-of-way, and in any event will be no less than 10 feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. 
2.  Height restrictions. The height of any freestanding sign at its highest point above the level of the ground shall not exceed 12 feet at its highest point. Provided, however, if the ground is lower than the level of the adjoining street pavement, then a sign may be raised so as to be no more than 12 feet above the level of the pavement. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
3.  Signs shall not project over property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 7, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 4.10.008. - Temporary signs. 
801.  Area, height and setback. In a non-residential zoning district pole signs no larger than six square feet in sign face area and five feet in height may be permitted as a temporary sign. No temporary pole sign shall be located in the public right-of-way, and in any event shall be located no less than ten feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. The square footage of said pole sign, when combined with other signs on the same lot, shall not exceed the total square footage authorized for signs in the land use category. Said pole sign shall not have flashing lights. 
802.  Duration of temporary signs. Each temporary permit will be valid for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days. No 30-day permit may be issued within 60 days after the expiration of any other 30-day permit. No individual business in a planned commercial center shall be allowed to erect a temporary sign or be issued such a permit. 
803.  Number of temporary signs. One permit for a combination of the listed types of temporary sign may be issued if all the temporary signs are for a concurrent time period. The permit holder shall be responsible for the prompt and complete removal of such signs upon the expiration of the permit. 
804.  Location of temporary signs. 
A.  No temporary sign shall be located in the public right-of-way, and in any event will be no less than ten feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. 
B.  Temporary signs are not allowed to be placed within or on the railroad right-of-way or private street easement. 
C.  A temporary sign shall not be affixed to any tree, utility pole or official traffic control sign or structure. 
D.  A temporary sign shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. 
805.  Construction and lighting standards of temporary signs. 
1.  Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as, but not limited to, poster board, foam core board or illustration board. 
2.  The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that convey the sign's message shall be permanently applied to the sign's face. Automatic changeable copy signs shall not be allowed. 
3.  Temporary signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
806.  Portable signs and streamers. Portable signs and streamers are allowed as temporary signs only on a property zoned commercial, industrial or in the city central business district subject to all provisions that pertain to temporary signs and the following additional restrictions 
A.  Portable signs. One portable sign per developed lot or business is allowed under the following conditions and requirements 
1.  Prior to the erection or placement of these signs or devices, all required fees and taxes shall be paid by the owner of the sign. 
2.  The maximum size allowance for these devices and signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. The square footage of said portable sign, when combined with other signs on the same lot, shall not exceed the total square footage authorized for signs in the land use category. Said sign shall not have flashing lights. 
3.  No portable sign shall be placed on a lot that is used for residential purposes. 
4.  The sign must be placed on the site in such a manner as to be at least five feet from the right-of-way and to not be an obstruction for traffic or visibility. 
5.  To prevent wind damage to the sign or other property, the sign must be securely anchored to the site. 
6.  All electrical connections to the sign must be in compliance with the electrical codes as adopted by the city, and must be inspected prior to use. 
7.  The maximum number of portable sign permits to be issued to a single location or site at any given time shall be one sign. 
8.  A site or location for the purpose of this section shall be defined as land under common ownership. 
B.  Streamers. 
1.  Streamers shall be counted towards the total square foot sign area permitted for the lot on which they are placed, and when added to the area of all other signs on said lot shall not exceed the total sign area permitted for the lot. 
2.  No part of any streamer shall be located in, on or within five feet of a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 8, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 4.10.009. - Sign permitting. 
901.  Sign permits; when required. In addition to a building permit as may be required under the building code, a sign permit shall be required prior to installation, erection, relocation, renovation, alteration, conversion, expansion, construction or reconstruction of any sign regulated under this chapter except for those signs specifically exempted from permitting under this chapter. No permit shall be issued except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
902.  Exemptions from requirement for sign permitting. 
A.  Sign permitting will not be required for legally existing signs for which a sign permit has previously been issued, under the following conditions: 
1.  Replacing or altering the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements that compose a sign's message, in whole or in part shall not require a sign permit unless a structural or size change is made. 
2.  Painting, repairing, cleaning, or maintaining a sign shall not require a sign permit unless a structural change is made. 
B.  Sign permitting will not be required for any signs that are exempt from permitting according to this chapter. 
C.  Sign permits are not required for residential signs as allowed under section 4.10.007.706. 
903.  Issuance of sign approval. 
Sign review required. For any sign requiring a sign permit under the provisions of this chapter, sign review shall be required prior to the issuance of the permit. The city planning director shall provide application forms upon request. A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 for non-temporary signs and $25.00 for temporary signs shall be paid with the completed application. The sign application shall be submitted to the city planning director. The application shall be approved or disapproved within ten days of filing and if disapproved written notice of the reasons for disapproval shall be given to the applicant. 
A.  Application for signs other than temporary signs. The application for a sign permit for all types of signs other than temporary signs must include the following: 
1.  An itemized list and a keyed scaled site plan showing the location of all existing signs and sign structures currently on the property. 
2.  An itemized list and a keyed scaled site plan showing the location of all proposed signs to be located on the property and all existing signs proposed to be removed. 
3.  A scaled drawing with dimensions and specifications, specifying materials, illumination, character sizes, colors, and support systems for each proposed sign. 
4.  The estimated cost of construction for each proposed sign. 
5.  An agreement wherein the applicant shall indemnify the city against all damages, demands, or expenses of any kind caused by the sign or sign structure. 
6.  Any other information as may be reasonably required to determine compliance with all provisions of this development code. 
B.  Application for temporary signs. The application for a sign approval for a temporary sign must include the following: 
1.  A list of the temporary signs to be placed on the property. 
2.  A description of the temporary signs to be placed on the property. 
3.  For portable signs and streamers, written and graphic evidence of compliance with all requirements of subsection 4.10.008.806. 
C.  Issuance of sign permit. Once a complete application for a sign approval, complete in all respects, has been received by the planning director, the planning director shall, within ten business days, review same for compliance with applicable regulations and either (a) issue the approval or (b) inform the applicant of the reasons why the approval cannot be issued. 
D.  Building permit required. For any sign requiring a building permit under the provisions of Section 4.10.005.501, issuance of a City building permit shall be required prior to the issuance of the sign permit. 
E.  Permit identification to be placed on the sign. Every permanent sign for which a permit is issued shall be plainly marked with the name of the permittee and shall have the number of the sign permit affixed on the framework in the lower right hand area of the sign or on the sign face using a durable material so that it is easily seen and weatherproof. 
F.  Expiration of sign permit for uncompleted construction. A sign permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been substantially completed (to the extent of at least 60 percent completion based on the estimated cost of construction from the application for sign approval) within six months of issuance. One six-month extension may be granted by the planning director for circumstances beyond applicant's control. Expiration of a sign permit shall automatically void any building permit issued for the construction of the sign. 
G.  Fee schedule. The mayor and council may from time to time by resolution, establish and/or modify said fee schedule as necessary to include, but not necessarily be limited to, the cost of issuing permits, making inspections and other administrative matters related to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 9, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2012-010, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 4.10.010. - Nonconforming signs. 
In all zoning districts, signs which on the effective date of this chapter become nonconforming with respect to the requirements set forth in this chapter may continue in existence so long as the size is not increased beyond that existing as of the effective date of this chapter. 
1001.  Nonconforming signs; defined. A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, and which by reason of such adoption or amendment fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter. 
1002.  Annexed nonconforming signs. Existing signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county ordinance which would become nonconforming under this chapter upon annexation by the city will be allowed to remain. 
1003.  Temporary signs to be removed. Any nonconforming sign that is temporary in nature and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building, such as but not limited to a portable sign, a streamer or pennant, shall be removed within 30 days of becoming a nonconforming sign. 
1004.  Treatment of illegal signs. 
A.  Illegal signs located within a public right-of-way or on public lands: 
1.  Signs located illegally within any public right-of-way or other public lands shall be removed immediately upon adoption of this chapter. 
2.  The planning director, building inspector, code enforcement director or officer or other city employee(s), (and/or private individuals, corporations and entities, if so authorized by the mayor and council), are authorized to remove and dispose of illegal signs from public rights-of-way and other public lands with or without notice to and at the expense of the owner, builder or other parties responsible for placement of said sign. 
B.  Illegal signs not located within a public right-of-way or on public lands: 
1.  A sign that was not lawfully existing under the city's regulations prior to adoption of this chapter shall, within 30 days of adoption of this chapter, either (a) be removed or (b) be brought into conformance with all provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Failure to remove such illegal sign or bring it into conformance following 30 days' notice to the owner or occupant of the property by the Planning Director shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
1005.  Removal due to road improvements. If a nonconforming sign must be removed due to a city or state road improvement project, the mayor and council may authorize the relocation of said sign even though the new location may not meet the setbacks, location and/or spacing or other provisions of this section provided any deviation from standards is the minimum practical. This subsection shall not allow the relocation of any sign for which the value has been paid to the owner by any government or government agency in conjunction with a road widening project. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 10, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 4.10.011. - Administration, enforcement, penalties, and remedies. 
1101.  Planning director. It shall be the duty of the Commerce city planning director, and he or she is hereby given the authority, to administer the provisions of this chapter and to issue sign permits consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
1102.  Code enforcement director. It shall be the duty of the Commerce city code enforcement director and/or officer, and he or she is hereby given the authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
1103.  Penalties for violation. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each offense according to City Code Section 1-12. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  A sign permit may be revoked by the planning director for any violation of this chapter. The planning director shall give written notice to the permittee stating the reasons for the revocation at least ten days prior to the effective date of the revocation. 
1104.  Remedies. If any sign or sign structure is installed, erected, relocated, renovated, constructed, reconstructed, altered, expanded, repaired, converted, or maintained in violation of this chapter, the mayor and council of Commerce City, the planning director, the code enforcement director or officer or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to stop the violation. 
1105.  Required action. In each case in this chapter where the issuance of a sign permit, a building permit or other action by any official of the city is required and a time period for such action is specified, then the failure of the official responsible for same to take such action or issue such permit shall be deemed an approval of the matter or the issuance of the permit, as the case may be. If at any place in the chapter an action is required by any such official and no time frame is provided herein, then such timeframe shall be deemed to be 45 days and the failure to act to either approve or deny same shall be deemed an approval of the matter or the issuance of the permit, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 11, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 4.10.012. - Appeals. 
This section is established to identify the procedure whereby any aggrieved party may appeal the order, requirement, decision or determination of the planning director, the code enforcement director or officer or any other party in the administration of this chapter. 
1201.  Appeals process. Any party aggrieved because of the alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the planning director, the code enforcement director or officer or any other party in the administration of this chapter, may appeal in writing to the mayor and council for an interpretation of this chapter. In exercising this power of interpretation, the mayor and council may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision, or determination. 
Appeals must be filed in writing with the city clerk within 30 days of the date on which the action being appealed was taken. 
The city planning commission shall conduct a public meeting upon at least five days' notice to applicant and at which the applicant and the city may present evidence. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the mayor and city council on any such appeal with 60 days of an appeals application being filed with the city clerk. The planning commission shall transmit the full record to the mayor and council. Within 30 days following the planning commission recommendation, the mayor and city council will make a decision concerning the appeal and the city clerk will issue the decision in writing to the applicant. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be based solely on the record from the planning commission. 
Should the planning commission fail to act within such 60-day period and/or the mayor and city council fail to act within the subsequent 30-day period, then the appeal shall be deemed to have been concluded in favor of the appealing party and any permit which is the subject of such appeal shall be deemed to be issued. 
1202.  Appeal from the mayor and council. Any person aggrieved by the decision by the mayor and city council may petition the Jackson Superior Court for a writ of certiorari. The petition must be filed with the court within 30 days of the issuance by the clerk of the decision by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, Art. 12, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 
4.10.013 - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this chapter of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, 3-19-18) 

Figure 1: Sign Types 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, 8-10-09) 

Figure 2: Single Sign 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, 8-10-09) 

Figure 3: Dual Sign 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, 8-10-09) 

Figure 4: Sign Face Area Measurements 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, 8-10-09) 

Figure 5: Sign Structure Area Measurements 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, 8-20-09) 

Figure 6: Wall Sign Measurement 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, 8-10-09) 

Figure 7: Area Measurement for Cylindrical Sign 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, 8-20-09) 
CHAPTER 4.11: - INDIVIDUAL MANUFACTURED HOMES 

4.11.001. - Individual mobile homes or individual manufactured homes. 
Individual mobile or manufactured homes not meeting the definition of "Manufactured Home, Class A" shall comply with the following and other applicable sections of this ordinance. 
A.  Limitations. No mobile home, as defined in this section, is permitted to be used as a residential dwelling. No mobile home, as defined in this section, is permitted to be moved into Commerce for use as a residential dwelling. Any mobile home which is currently being used as a residential dwelling prior to September l, 2016 may continue to be used as a residential dwelling as a non-conforming use subject to the requirements of Chapter 5.04 of this Code. The attachment of a mobile home or manufactured home to an existing mobile or manufactured home is permitted only if both units were engineered and manufactured for such attachment. 
B.  Building and occupancy permits. Building and occupancy permits issued by the Commerce Zoning Administrator or his/her authorized agent are required for any mobile or manufactured home: 
1.  Which is hereafter located to Commerce; 
2.  Which is moved from one location to a second location within the city where that manufactured housing unit will house persons or property; 
3.  Which has not been occupied within the preceding 12 months; 
4.  Where there is a change in use of the manufactured housing unit; or 
5.  If the mobile or manufactured home is added to or structurally altered 100 square feet or more. 
A building permit shall not be issued for a mobile home containing aluminum wiring. 
Prior to issuing a building permit, it is unlawful to move, locate, relocate, erect or make utility connections of any kind to a mobile or manufactured home in Commerce. 
All mobile and manufactured homes must be registered with the Jackson County Tax Commissioner and approval of the septic system by the Jackson County Health Department must be obtained before an occupancy permit can be issued. 
Prior to issuing an occupancy permit it is unlawful to occupy or otherwise use as a residence a mobile or manufactured home in Commerce. 
C.  Application requirements for building and occupancy permits for mobile or manufactured homes. An application for permits for location and occupancy of a mobile or manufactured home is required to be filed by the owner or the owner's agent in the office of the Commerce Zoning Administrator before a building or occupancy permit is issued. 
The permit application shall describe the mobile or manufactured home as to size, dimension, year, model, the zoning district and tax map and parcel number of the planned location of the mobile or manufactured home, the intended use of the mobile or manufactured home, the name of the owner and the name of the intended occupants, and the source of water and type of waste disposal system. 
If the intended use of the mobile or manufactured home is as an accessory use, hardship use or farm caretaker, then details of such proposed use shall be provided by the applicant. 
Mobile and manufactured homes shall: 
Be provided with prefabricated or permanent stairs and landing, constructed of pressure treated lumber, masonry or metal sufficient to provide safe ingress and egress from two exterior doors of the unit. Individual landings shall meet Commence building codes; and, be underpinned with skirting material of masonry construction (bricks, concrete blocks faced with brick, or concrete blocks faced with stucco). All manufactured homes must be attached to a permanent foundation with underpinning of brick or masonry construction and meet all other applicable state and city statutes, regulations and ordinances. However, for manufactured homes, load bearing masonry curtain walls shall not be required (although curtain walls may be required for aesthetic purposes), and non-load bearing curtain walls for manufactured homes shall not have contact with the manufactured home for the purpose of structural support, although non-load bearing curtain walls may be attached to the manufactured home for aesthetic purposes and not for structural support. See Georgia Rules and Regulations section 120-3-7-.14, as may hereinafter be amended. 
D.  Temporary usage. A manufactured home may be used as an office in a subdivision or commercial district, by a contractor during construction or development. The above use must be requested in writing, be for a period not to exceed 12 months, and have written approval of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may extend the 12-month period one time where necessary for up to an additional 12-month period. 
E.  Accessory buildings. A mobile or manufactured home may not be used as an accessory building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-010, 9-19-16) 
CHAPTER 4.12: - MANUFACTURED HOME INSTALLATION 

4.12.001. - Installation. 
All manufactured homes, located to or moved with the City of Commerce at or after the adoption of this ordinance shall be installed by a licensed installer as required by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-164, and in accordance with the applicable manufacturer's installation instructions, specifically including, without limitation, correctly installed tie-downs and anchors. In the absence of such instructions, installation shall be performed in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety fire commissioner. (See O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.) 
A.  A curtain wall or foundation, unpierced except for required ventilation and access and constructed of masonry, is installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. Such a wall shall have a minimum thickness of four inches. 
B.  The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  For purposes of this definition, no manufactured home may be attached to any other Manufactured Home, Class A, by means of breezeway, corridor or hallway. 
E.  No manufactured home shall be located within 30 feet of any permanent building. 
F.  Landings of the requisite composition and size as per Section 1113 of the Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International, with said provisions being expressly incorporated by reference herein as part of this requirement. 
G.  Manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
H.  Manufactured home, Class B's are restricted to approved and conforming mobile home parks only. No Class B mobile home may be placed on a single-family lot within the City of Commerce. 
I.  Certificates of occupancy will only be issued when all of the above items are approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-014, 10-11-10) 
CHAPTER 4.13: - ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY BUILDINGS 

4.13.001. - Accessory buildings. 
The location of accessory buildings and uses must meet the following requirements: 
A.  All accessory building, structures, and uses of land, including off-street parking, shall be located on the same lot as the principal building(s) to which they are accessory. 
B.  Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof, and therefore meet requirements applicable to the main building. 
C.  No accessory building shall be utilized unless the principal structure is also occupied. 
D.  A property owner seeking to erect or install any accessory building or structure which is in a residential district and which exceeds 1,000 square feet of gross interior space must apply for a permit prior to commencing construction or installation. The application shall be presented first to the planning commission which shall make its recommendation to the city council for final approval or denial, as to the location, architectural design, and size. 
E.  Any accessory building, except detached garage or carport, must be located behind the rear building line of the principal building on the parcel where the accessory building is located. A detached garage or carport shall not be located forward of the front building line. 
F.  Manufactured homes shall not be used as accessory building in any residential zoning district. 
G.  No storage trailer shall be used as a temporary or accessory structure. 
H.  All accessory buildings shall have a maximum height of two stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower. 
I.  Accessory buildings over 200 square feet shall not be constructed of metal exterior material. 
J.  An accessory use shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 2008-013, 7-21-08) 
4.13.002. - Temporary buildings. 
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any non-residential zoning district provided that no temporary building shall be used for a residential purpose and the building shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
CHAPTER 4.14: - HOME OCCUPATION 

4.14.001. - Home occupation. 
The conduct of business in residential units may be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to: ensure the compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in the applicable zoning districts; maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods; and provide peace, quiet, and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods within the zoning district, in order to guarantee to all residents freedom from excessive noise, excessive traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other possible effect of commercial uses being conducted in this zoning district. Residential home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
A.  A home occupation is subordinate to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in connection with a home occupation or for storage purposes in connection with a home occupation. 
B.  No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within a single dwelling unit. 
C.  A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal use. No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings or garages, attached or detached. 
D.  No one other than residents of the dwelling shall be employed in the conduct of a home occupation. 
E.  A home occupation shall produce no noise or obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perception outside the structure. 
F.  A home occupation which will constitute a fire hazard to neighboring residences, will adversely affect neighboring property values, or will constitute a nuisance or otherwise be detrimental to the neighbors because of excessive traffic, excessive noise, odors, or other circumstances is not be permitted. 
G.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupations in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off-street and other than in a front yard. 
H.  On the premises, retail sales are prohibited except for the retail sales of products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. 
I.  There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal use. 
J.  There shall be no on-street parking of business related vehicles (either marked or commercially equipped) in any residential district. No more than one business-related vehicle that is no larger than a van, panel truck, or pick-up truck is permitted to park overnight on a residentially zoned parcel. 
K.  Permitted residential home occupations: 
1.  Architectural services. 
2.  Art studio. 
3.  Beauty shop. 
4.  Consulting services. 
5.  Data processing. 
6.  Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Jaffra, Tupperware, Herbalife). 
7.  Drafting and graphic services. 
8.  Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring, contract sewing (one machine). 
9.  Electronic assembly. 
10.  Engineering service. 
11.  Financial planning or investment services. 
12.  Flower arranging. 
13.  House cleaning service. 
14.  Insurance sales or broker. 
15.  Interior design. 
16.  Locksmith. 
17.  Real estate sales or broker. 
18.  Tutoring. 
19.  Writing, computer programming. 
20.  Other similar uses as approved by the mayor and council. 
L.  Prohibited residential home occupations: 
1.  Ambulance service. 
2.  Appliance repair. 
3.  Automobile repair, parts sales, upholstery, or detailing, washing service (including businesses working at customer's home). 
4.  Boarding house, bed and breakfast. 
5.  Carpentry, cabinet makers. 
6.  Contracting, masonry, plumbing, or painting. 
7.  Medical or dental office (nor any practice of physical or medical application, including chiropractors). 
8.  Restaurants, food preparation. 
9.  Tow truck services. 
10.  Veterinary uses (including care, grooming or boarding). 
CHAPTER 4.15: - GAS STATIONS 
Within the zoning districts permitting gas stations, the following requirements shall apply: 

4.15.001. - Location. 
The property on which a gasoline service station is located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential zoning district, or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, institution for children or dependents. 
4.15.002. - Site requirements. 
A gas station shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of 100 feet and a minimum area of 12,000 square feet. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from all street right-of-way lines and all canopies shall be set back 15 feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
4.15.003. - Access to site. 
Vehicular entrances or exits at an gasoline service station: 
A.  Shall not be provided with more than two curb cuts for the first 100 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 
B.  Shall contain an access width along the curb line of the street of not more than 30 feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and shall not be located closer than 25 feet from the intersecting point of the two streets rights-of-way or ten feet to the adjoining property. 
C.  Shall not have any two driveways, or curb cuts, any closer than 20 feet at both the right-of-way line and the curb or edge of the pavement along a single street. 
4.15.004. - Gasoline pump islands. 
All gasoline pump islands shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line, and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line, the pump island shall be located not less than 30 feet from the right-of-way line; however, the pump island shall be at least 60 feet from the center line of an arterial street and 45 feet from the center line of other streets. 
4.15.005. - Off-street parking. 
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces are required with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 
4.15.006. - Other site improvements. 
In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
A.  A raised curb of at least six inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines, except for driveway openings. 
B.  A transitional buffer is required between dissimilar districts or uses. Buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning, or as authorized herein, and shall contain the existing tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental plantings as may be required. Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities, structures, and uses on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot and shall further provide a year-round effective visual screen. Buffers required along side property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required to observe the sight distance requirements or as authorized as a condition of zoning. In situations where the required buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement (i.e. power or natural gas transmission, etc.) the screening requirements of this ordinance shall be met outside of the easement area. 
C.  Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and streets. 
D.  Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within the public right-of-way and shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
E.  All drives, parking storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
F.  A drive-through lane of sufficient width to allow motor vehicle to enter and exit the property. 
4.15.007. - Storage of inflammable products. 
Outside above ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil or other inflammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any gas station. All used motor oil shall be stored in underground tanks. However, storage tanks for the retail sales of propane gas shall be permitted. 
CHAPTER 4.16: - BED AND BREAKFAST 

4.16.001. - Bed and breakfast. 
A.  The acceptance of paying guests shall be an accessory use to the dwelling unit; 
B.  The only uses permitted shall be the renting of rooms and the serving of foods to guests renting said rooms (accessory uses commonly associated with hotels and motels, i.e. laundry services, gift shops, banquet halls, barber and beauty shops, shall not be permitted); 
C.  All parking shall be off-street; and 
D.  The operator of the bed and breakfast must live on the premises. 
CHAPTER 4.17: - OUTDOOR STORAGE 

4.17.001. - Outdoor storage. 
A.  Standards for outdoor storage in residential districts. Outdoor storage on properties used or zoned for residential purposes shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Shall not be used for occupancy, either temporarily or permanently. 
(2)  Boats, recreational vehicles, campers, trailers, or personal watercraft or other recreational vehicles shall be located behind the plane of the front building façade of the primary residence (storage of such items within a completely enclosed garage or storage building shall be exempt from this standard). 
B.  Standards for outdoor storage in commercial or industrial districts. Outdoor storage on properties used or zoned for commercial or industrial uses shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Outdoor storage shall be located behind the front building facade of the principal structure. 
(2)  Outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a concrete or asphalt surface. 
(3)  Materials shall not be stacked more than 12 feet in height and shall be fully screened from view from road rights-of-way and adjacent properties by a fence or wall at least eight feet in height. 
C.  The storage yard must not be located within a required front yard. Outdoor storage shall only be allowed in the rear yard of any property zoned or approved for commercial or industrial uses. 
D.  The storage yard must be setback at least 25 feet from any side or rear property lines. 
E.  Storage areas may also be used as outdoor display areas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.18: - CLUB OR LODGE 

4.18.001. - Club or lodge. 
The buildings are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line: 
A.  Unless located adjacent to a residential district, there shall be a planted buffer area ten feet wide along its exterior boundary lines not bordering the frontage street and not extending into the required front yard. The buffer area should be planted with evergreen trees or evergreen shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall within five years and provide an effective visual screen. 
B.  A complete development sketch must be submitted with the application. 
C.  Adequate paved and lined off-street parking must be provided. 
CHAPTER 4.19: - NON-OPERATING VEHICLES 

4.19.001. - Non-operating vehicles. 
A.  All vehicles not in operating condition must be parked in the rear yard, carport, or garage. If parked in rear yard, the vehicle may not be visible from any public street or adjacent property. 
B.  All automobile parts must be stored within a garage or enclosed building. 
CHAPTER 4.20: - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA 

4.20.001. - Satellite dish antenna. 
A.  Thirteen-foot diameter or larger satellite antenna dish must be located behind the rear building line and outside the side yard setback. 
B.  Eighteen-inch or smaller satellite antenna dish shall not be located on the dwelling's front yard wall or on any front yard roof plane. Dish antennas may be located on either a backyard roof plane, backyard dwelling wall, or side yard dwelling wall. 
CHAPTER 4.21: - TOWERS 
See section 78-121 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Commerce, Georgia. 
CHAPTER 4.22: - COMBINATION GAS STATION/CONVENIENCE STORE/FAST FOOD RESTAURANT 
Combination gas station, fast-food restaurant, and convenience stores shall be regulated on a site-by-site basis under conditional standards that address the following issues. 

4.22.001. - Circulation. 
The zoning administrator shall required that the site accommodate high levels of traffic while maintaining the smooth circulation of vehicles on site. 
A.  Driveways and service areas shall be place in locations that reduce the chance of interrupting on-site vehicle movement. Buildings must be placed in a manner that screens the drive-through land and creates pedestrian pathways and spaces. In order to maintain on-site circulation, each drive-through area is to be separate from pump islands and from routes necessary for entering and exiting the property. 
4.22.002. - Parking. 
On-site parking for facilities that combine gas stations with convenience stores and fast food restaurants must equal three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.22.003. - Landscaping/buffering. 
A.  Where the site is adjacent to residential development or commercially zoned properties, landscaping requirements include the construction of a 30-foot-deep transitional organically landscaped buffer yard and an opaque or nearly opaque screen consisting of a wall, fence, or evergreen vegetation to a height of at least eight feet, in addition to a minimum total landscaping equal to at least 20 percent of the area of the site not covered by buildings. 
B.  Speaker boxes shall not be audible on any residential property adjacent to the business. 
4.22.004. - Signs. 
Signs shall comply with this chapter as applied to the commercial zoning districts with the following limitations: 
A.  Only one freestanding sign identifying businesses located on the property is allowed. 
B.  One wall sign is allowed per subtenant but the aggregate square footage of all subtenant signs cannot exceed 25 percent of the front wall area. 
CHAPTER 4.23: - SWIMMING POOL 

4.23.001. - Swimming pools, location and approval. 
Above or below ground swimming pools must be located behind the rear building line and shall not be closer than ten feet to any property line. If the pool is served by a septic tank, the pool must be constructed in accordance with ICC regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-007, 6-14-10) 
CHAPTER 4.24: - UPPER FLOOR RESIDENTIAL IN THE CBD 

4.24.001. - Minimum floor space requirements and maximum number of occupants. 
A.  Studio unit—500 square feet—Two occupants. 
B.  One bedroom—750 square feet—Two occupants. 
C.  Two bedroom—1,000 square feet—Four occupants. 
4.24.002. - Building codes. 
All upper floor residential renovations shall comply with all existing commercial building codes and fire codes (NEPA Life Safety Code, 1990 Edition, Southern Building Code, Standards Fire Prevention Code) with fire walls. 
4.24.003. - Restrictions. 
A.  All window treatments must be color coordinated with other window treatments in the upper floor residential apartment. No signs, drawing or photographs incorporated into the window treatments. 
B.  No outside mailboxes are permitted. 
C.  No outside television or radio antennas or satellite reception equipments is permitted. Cable TV connections are permitted if located at the rear of the building. 
D.  Daily or weekly boarding rooms are prohibited. Only full-time renter or owner occupied dwelling units are permitted. 
E.  Each dwelling unit shall be furnished with a washer and dryer and garbage disposal unit. 
F.  No drying of clothes is permitted on the outside of any building. 
G.  No household pets are allowed. This includes animals that are customarily kept as companion animals within the home and includes, but is not limited to, domestic dogs, domestic cats, birds, rodents, swine, reptile or fowl. 
H.  Entry to the unit or to a hallway serving one or more units shall be provided by a stairway opening directly to the outside; except where the owner occupies both the ground level and the upper floor residential apartment, then entry may be through the ground floor. No dwelling unit shall occupy street level frontage. 
I.  No window unit air-conditioning unit shall be visible from the front street. 
J.  Washing or waxing of vehicles is not permitted in the parking are for the dwelling unit. 
K.  No recreation, entertainment, public gathering or placement of furniture is allowed on the sidewalks unless permitted by the mayor and council. 
L.  No garage sales or yard sales are allowed. 
4.24.004. - Parking. 
A.  Each resident of an upper floor residential unit shall be restricted to one vehicle for a studio unit and two for all other units. No vehicle shall park on the public streets or alleys in those areas designated as "two-hour parking zones" during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday or from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Saturday. All parking shall be restricted to off-street parking when ever possible. 
B.  violations of this requirement shall be prosecuted the same as violation of the two-hour parking restriction set forth in the city's Code of Ordinances. 
C.  A separate residential approved trash container shall be furnished for each dwelling unit with its location approved by the city. 
D.  A copy of Chapter 4.24 of this ordinance shall be made a part of each lease agreement. 
CHAPTER 4.25: - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

4.25.001. - Building and site plan review application. 
All application for building and site plan review shall be filed with the city clerk at least 45 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the application will be reviewed. An application for building and site plan review shall contain the following: 
A.  Three copies of a preliminary building and site plan, drawn to scale of not more than one inch equals 200 feet, showing the following information must be submitted to the planning commission for review: 
1.  Surveyed plat signed by a registered surveyor. 
2.  Project name. 
3.  Project owner. 
4.  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
5.  Vicinity map. 
6.  Use of adjacent property. 
7.  Exterior dimensions of the site. 
8.  Total project acreage. 
9.  Location, name and width of all existing or proposed streets. 
10.  Location of all proposed structures. 
11.  Location of all off-street parking and driveway serving the project. 
12.  Proposed buffers and/or screening. 
13.  Location, height, fixture type and wattage of site lighting. 
14.  Dumpster locations. 
15.  Rough floor plans, including gross floor area. 
16.  Building height. 
B.  Once the application is submitted, it cannot be amended. Incomplete applications will not be processed. 
4.25.002. - Approve, approve with conditions, disapprove, or table for further action the proposed site plan. 
The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, disapprove, or table for further action the proposed site plan. If the planning commission fails to act on the application within 60 days of its submission or by its next regularly scheduled meeting, whichever is later, the application is deemed to have been approved unless the application is tabled, postponed, or withdrawn. 
4.25.003. - Permit required. 
After approval of the site and building plan, a manufactured home park permit must be obtained by the developer prior to any grading or clearing. 
4.25.004. - Park design standards. 
A.  Minimum size of park: Ten acres. 
B.  Minimum road frontage for an entrance and exit: 100 feet. 
C.  Minimum lot width for the portion of the park containing manufactured home space, or stands: 80 feet. 
D.  Minimum lot size: 11,000 square feet. 
E.  Density: A maximum of three and one-half manufactured home units per acre. 
F.  At least 20 percent of the park area must be set aside as open area for recreation purposes. 
G.  Setbacks. The manufactured home park shall be designed so that each home and its accessory structures shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet from interior park streets, and at least 40 feet from any publicly dedicated right-of-way. Manufactured home stands shall be designed so as to provide a distance of at least 30 feet between manufactured homes. 
H.  Access. The manufactured home park shall front upon at least one publicly dedicated street for a minimum width of 100 feet. Each home site and its parking area shall have direct access to the internal street system of the park. 
I.  Streets. In general, streets within a manufactured home park shall be privately owned, constructed, and maintained. Streets and curb and gutter within the subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with the Commerce Subdivision Regulations. 
J.  Parking. Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with a minimum of two paved off-street parking spaces. The front yard space may be used for parking of motor vehicles. However, the side yard and rear yard space may not be used for parking vehicles of any description. 
4.25.005. - Stand requirements. 
Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with the following minimum requirements: 
A.  Access frontage of at least 50 feet; 
B.  A garbage rack designed to prevent rodent and animal access; 
C.  Necessary commercial dumpsters with accessible locations throughout the park for garbage collection. 
D.  A properly grounded, water-proofed electrical receptacle with a minimum rated capacity of 200 amperes and including a properly sized electrical disconnect; 
E.  A minimum five-eighth-inch water meter placed on the front of the lot adjacent to the street right-of-way line; 
F.  Fire hydrants placed within 500 feet of each manufactured home stand; 
G.  A properly sized residential gas meter; 
H.  A property and/or street designation or other appropriate numbering device at least 12 inches high and visible from the road, properly identifying each manufactured home stand placed at the interior side lot line at a point within five feet of the road right-of-way of the park; and 
I.  On-site parking of at least 400 square feet in the front yard finished in a hard pavement surface. 
4.25.006. - General requirements. 
A.  At least 30 spaces must be approved before the manufactured home park can be approved for occupancy. 
B.  No space shall be rented for a period of less than 30 days. 
C.  Manufactured homes must not be more than seven years in age. 
D.  All spaces shall be rental only. No space may be sold and all manufactured homes shall be occupied either by the owner of the home, the owner of the park, or the resident manager. 
E.  The park shall be provided with a sewer collection system approved by the City of Commerce of the Jackson County Health Department, allowing service to each stand and commercial structure. 
F.  Publicly dedicated easements of proper size for their intended use shall be provided within the park if individual stands and accessory park uses are to be serviced by a public system. 
G.  All utilities shall be installed to City of Commerce specifications. 
H.  A copy of the park management rules and regulations must be submitted to the building official for approval. The park operator will be responsible for compliance with these regulations by all tenants. Failure to abide by these regulations or any other of the City of Commerce will be considered a valid reason for revoking the manufactured home park permit required to operate a manufactured home park in the City of Commerce. 
I.  No commercial establishment of any description except an on-site laundry may be allowed within the park boundary. 
J.  All manufactured homes must be located on a permanent foundation. 
4.25.007. - Manufactured home installation. 
Manufactured homes placed within the park shall meet the following conditions before they can be approved for occupancy: 
A.  Setback requirements of subsection [4.25.004.G]; 
B.  Connection to approved water and sewerage disposal systems; 
C.  Electrical connections that comply with electrical codes; 
D.  Home cannot be more than seven years old; 
E.  Installation in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; 
F.  Enclosed by a curtain wall of manufactured home skirting material, or masonry construction painted to match the exterior of the manufactured home; 
G.  Home must bear the approval seal of either H.U.D. or Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
CHAPTER 4.26: - APARTMENTS AND MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS 

4.26.001. - Parking. 
A.  All parking shall be off-street and shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to the street or in interior of blocks. An off-street parking space shall not be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
B.  All parking shall be paved. 
4.26.002. - Pavement width. 
All streets, drives or alleys in the development shall have a pavement width of 20 feet, and have a bituminous, concrete surface, or asphalt surface. 
4.26.003. - Utilities. 
All apartments and multi-family dwellings shall be served by the public sanitary sewerage and water systems. 
CHAPTER 4.27: - FENCES AND WALLS 
The following provisions shall govern the location and height of fences and walls: 

4.27.001. - In the front yard. 
Fences and walls in the front yard shall not exceed four feet in height. Fences and walls shall be set back at least two feet from the edge of the right-of-way and must conform to clear view triangle standards. Chain link fences are prohibited in the front yard. 
(Ord. No. 2008-011, 5-12-08) 
4.27.002. - In the side yard. 
Fences and walls may be placed on or behind the side property line. No fence or wall shall exceed six feet eight inches in height within the required side yard setback area from a street. In commercial and industrial districts, ten feet shall be the maximum height behind the required street setback and in the side yards not bordering a street. 
4.27.003. - In the rear yard. 
Fences and walls may be placed on or behind the rear property line. In the residential districts six feet eight inches is the maximum fence or wall height in the rear yard. Provided, that when the rear yard abuts a designated arterial, the maximum height shall be eight feet. In a commercial or industrial district, ten feet is the maximum height. 
4.27.004. - Privacy area for zero lot line dwelling. 
Where any property line of a zero lot line dwelling abuts other property within the same overall development zoned or used for residential purposes, there shall be provided and properly maintained along the property line a continuous visual screen not less than six feet in height. The requirement does not apply to townhouse development. The screen shall be a windowless wall or fence constructed from material which is aesthetically compatible with existing development. However, the requirement for a privacy wall along any property line may be omitted or modified where the planning commission has determined that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
A.  Due to special conditions and circumstances of a physical or dimensional nature which are peculiar to the property involved, a privacy wall would serve no valid purpose. 
B.  The provision of a privacy wall along any side and/or rear property line would deny the property involved advantages of amenities specifically associated with the overall development. 
4.27.005. - Fence and wall construction materials. 
Fences and wall constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be constructed any of the following materials: 
A.  Chain link (vinyl and non vinyl coated). 
B.  Masonry (brick, stuccoed concrete block). 
C.  Wood (generally produced for fence construction). 
D.  Wood-like materials. 
E.  Barbed wire or hog wire in agriculturally zoned areas only. 
4.27.006. - Gates required. 
In those instances where a fence or wall is erected as an enclosure which restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate shall be a minimum of three feet in width. The location of the gate shall be positioned at any point paralleling the front lot line between the side lot line and the principal structure. 
4.27.007. - Tennis courts. 
Fencing of outdoor tennis courts may be link and shall not exceed 16 feet in height and shall conform to the principal building setback requirements for the zoning district. 
4.27.008. - Maintenance. 
Every fence or wall shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair, damage, or unsightliness, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence or wall which is, or has become dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare, or has become unsightly through improper maintenance or neglect is a public nuisance and the building official shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof. 
4.27.009. - Exemptions. 
Areas zoned agricultural are exempt from the height requirements of this chapter. 
4.27.010. - Finished fence. 
Finished side of fence shall face to the outside of the property. 
4.27.011. - Fencing for screening purposes. 
Whenever in this Code fencing is required for the purposes of screening a lot or a use from view, such fencing shall be a minimum of six feet in height, unless a greater height is specified, and such fencing shall be constructed of solid vinyl, masonry or composite materials. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-003, adopted June 4, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as § 4.27.001. To avoid duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 4.27.011. 
CHAPTER 4.28: - DAYCARE FACILITIES 

4.28.001. - Daycare facilities. 
Daycare center and home daycare outdoor play area and outdoor playground equipment shall be enclosed and screened from view on all sides by a fence. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.29: - FLEA MARKETS AND OPEN-AIR MARKETS 

4.29.001. - Flea markets and open-air markets. 
Flea markets and open-air markets shall be located either in an enclosed building or under a permanent roof. This section shall not apply to yard sales allowed under section 18-41 of the City Code or to temporary outdoor events. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.30: - HOTELS/MOTELS 

4.30.001. - Hotels/motels. 
The following standards shall apply to hotels/motels: 
A.  Minimum acreage shall be one and one-half acres; 
B.  All guestrooms shall be accessed via internal corridors; 
C.  Lobby area shall be a minimum of 500 square feet in size; 
D.  No hotel shall rent a room to the same guest for more than 180 days or be used as a multi-family apartment building; 
E.  Each hotel shall provide 24-hour on-site management and, at a minimum, weekly cleaning shall be performed for each room or suite; and 
F.  No outside storage or parking of equipment or vehicles shall be allowed other than vehicles used daily by guests and employees. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.31: - MANUFACTURED HOME SALES, LEASING OR RENTING 

4.31.001. - Manufactured home sales, leasing or renting. 
A.  Businesses engaged in the sale, lease or rental of manufactured housing shall maintain an office on the premises located in a permanent building. 
B.  Property abutting public rights-of-way shall be screened by a three-foot wide landscaped buffer consisting of plantings to provide a vertical visual screen at least three feet in height. 
C.  Outdoor display of manufactured homes is allowed notwithstanding other provisions of this Code subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  All manufactured homes offered for sale, lease, or rent shall be parked on an asphalt or concrete surface in good condition and free of damage. 
(2)  A minimum separation of at least ten feet shall be maintained between manufactured homes on outdoor display. 
(3)  Manufactured homes shall be secured to their display pads as approved by the building department. 
(4)  Any display area not paved for display pads or parking or driveways shall be grassed or mulched. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.32: - OUTDOOR STORAGE CONTAINERS 

4.32.001. - Outdoor storage containers. 
A.  Standards: 
(1)  Outdoor storage containers shall be used only for the storage of plant materials such as hay or straw for direct retail sale to customers provided however that outdoor storage containers may be used during construction to temporarily store equipment or material but shall be removed upon occupancy of the building and/or expiration of the building permit, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Outdoor storage containers shall be incidental to the principal use of a site and shall not be located on vacant property. 
(3)  Outdoor storage containers shall be kept in good condition and free of damage, rust, graffiti, signs, banners, etc. 
(4)  Outdoor storage containers shall not: 
a.  Be used as a dwelling nor any other purpose but storage; 
b.  Be provided with utility services; 
c.  Have any structure connecting outdoor storage containers with one another; 
d.  Be stacked; or 
e.  Used to store flammable liquids or other hazard materials as determined by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.33: - PAWNSHOP, PAYDAY LOANS, TITLE PAWN, CHECK CASHING AND BAIL BOND BUSINESSES 

4.33.001. - Pawnshop, payday loans, title pawn, check cashing and bail bond businesses. 
A pawnshop, payday loan, title pawn, check cashing or bail bond business shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet away from any other building containing a like business. This restriction does not apply to FDIC and FSLIC insured financial businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.34: - MINI-WAREHOUSE/SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES 

4.34.001. - Mini-warehouse/self-storage facilities. 
A.  Standards: 
(1)  All vehicular circulation and parking within the site shall have concrete or asphalt surfaces. 
(2)  Any storage of watercraft, RVs or other similar vehicles shall be screened from view by fencing from any street right-of-way. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited within self-storage facilities: 
(1)  Individual storage bays shall not be considered or used as a premise for assigning a legal address. 
(2)  Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals is prohibited. 
(3)  Uses not related to the temporary storage of personal property including use as a residence, office, workshop (including vehicle, appliance or equipment repair), studio, band rehearsal area or other place of business or worship are prohibited. 
(4)  Commercial transactions including auctions, retail or wholesale sales, or garage sales other than those associated with the rental of the storage units or the specific disposal of items within a unit by the owner of the self-storage facility are prohibited. 
(5)  Operation of power tools, spray-painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns, or similar equipment is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.35: - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS 

4.35.001. - Tattoo establishments. 
A.  There shall be a minimum separation distance of 500 feet between tattoo establishments. 
B.  Tattoo parlors shall be separated by at least 500 feet from any residential district, existing residential use, excluding upper floor residential uses in the central business district. 
C.  All federal, state, and local regulations for tattoo establishments shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.36: - THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

4.36.001. - Therapeutic massage establishments. 
Any establishment offering therapeutic massages shall be required to have the person providing the massage therapy to hold a valid massage therapy license issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.37: - OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND RETAIL SALES OF MERCHANDISE OR GOODS 

4.37.001. - Outdoor display and retail sales of merchandise or goods. 
A.  Merchandise or goods may be on display outdoors for the purpose of customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers only as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor display areas shall only be allowed on property zoned or approved for retail, sales of goods and merchandise. 
(2)  All lots used for outdoor display shall have a permanent sales structure on the lot. 
(3)  Outdoor display shall not encroach on any required parking areas or be located in a designated landscape area. 
(4)  Outdoor display shall be limited to store hours and removed and placed inside a fully enclosed building each day. 
(5)  No person shall be allowed or permitted to obstruct any sidewalk or street in the city by putting any box, table, steps, merchandise or any other similar thing thereon or to use the streets and sidewalks for the display of goods, wares or merchandise of any kind. 
(6)  Outdoor display shall be confined to within five feet of the business structure's front building facade. It shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the horizontal width of the front building facade. 
(7)  Outdoor display shall not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the sidewalk or parking areas and shall comply with ADA clearance and accessibility. 
B.  Outdoors retail sales of certain merchandise or goods is subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Only the following types of businesses are subject to the provisions of this subsection: 
a.  The sale or display of plant material and seasonal items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins, and fruits and vegetables. 
b.  Sale, leasing or renting displays of boats, personal recreational vehicles, farm and agricultural implements or equipment. 
(2)  Outdoors retail sales shall only be allowed in commercial district. 
(3)  All merchandise shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the road/street and 25 feet from any property line, except in the central business district where section 4.37.00l.A shall apply. 
(4)  Merchandise and goods for sale shall not exceed a height of ten feet in the front yard and 20 feet in the rear yard. 
(5)  Merchandise in outdoor retail sales areas may be kept outside after store hours but shall be kept organized and clean. 
(6)  Merchandise shall not be displayed in any required parking or landscape/buffer area without the consent of the property owner. 
(7)  All display and storage areas shall have merchandise placed upon a concrete or asphalt surface. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.38: - MOTOR VEHICLE SALES OR RENTAL LOT 

4.38.001. - Motor vehicle sales or rental lot. 
The term "motor vehicle" as used in this section is defined as any self-propelled or towed vehicles required by the state to be titled or registered, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, trailer coaches, campers, and trailers, and weighing over 2,500 pounds. No motor vehicle sales or rental lot shall be located in any zone other than C-2 and M-l. 
Used motor vehicle: Any pre-owned, leased, or second-hand motor vehicle to which a certificate of title and license plates have been issued and which at a prior time has been registered for use on the highways by a consumer or by a dealer, and any used or second-hand vehicle, defined as: 
A.  The lot of record must be a minimum of one and one-half acres in order to operate a motor vehicle sales lot. If repair center is on the same lot, the minimum lot size shall be two acres. 
B.  In order for there to be an automotive repair shop on the same property as a motor vehicle sales lot, the sales lot must offer new motor vehicles for sale. 
C.  The applicant shall submit to the city planning department written detailed site plans and landscaping plans for the property to be used including method proposed for improvement, drainage, parking and display areas, driveways for ingress and egress, signage and buildings to be built or existing buildings to be used in the operation of the business. Off-street parking spaces, site plans, landscaping and buffers, and signage shall be in accordance with the requirements for the applicable zoning district in which the property use is located. 
D.  A sales or rental office shall be provided and shall meet all requirements of the current building code as adopted by the City of Commerce. 
E.  If the facility provides an automotive repair shop, it must be separately licensed to do so, and all applicable requirements must be separately met. 
F.  Setback. An off-street pavement setback from public thoroughfares shall be maintained for the safety of prospective buyers viewing displayed vehicles. The setback shall be a minimum of five feet from the parking lot pavement to the right-of-way or, on corner lots, five feet from the parking lot pavement to the right-of-way along both rights-of-way. Within this setback area, a landscaped strip of at least five feet wide, which shall not include a sidewalk or trail, shall be located between the vehicular parking area and the public right-of-way, except where driveways cross the property line. Notwithstanding the above, no vehicles may be displayed or parked on the public right-of-way. 
G.  Surface pavement. All motor vehicles for sale, lease, or rent shall be parked on an asphalt or concrete surface which shall be maintained in good condition and free of damage. In no event shall vehicles be parked on grass or unprepared surfaces. 
H.  Required parking spaces for customers shall be designated separately from those areas used to display motor vehicles for sale. 
I.  Turn-around. An adequate turn-around area shall be provided so that vehicles shall not back out into traffic from the property. 
J.  Disabled or damaged vehicles shall not be permitted to remain in an exterior location unless screened from public view. Screened areas shall only be allowed in areas to the rear of the principal structure of the business. Screening fences shall be provided on any property line that abuts any right-of-way and any adjoining property. 
K.  Other types of existing businesses requesting to operate a motor vehicle sales or rental lot shall not be permitted to utilize existing designated required parking spaces for that existing business for a motor vehicle sales or rental lot. Any existing business requesting license or zoning for a motor vehicle sales or rental lot shall meet all of the criteria described herein. 
L.  Any change in business ownership or discontinuance in the use of the property for the purpose of a motor vehicle sales or rental lot shall cancel the motor vehicle sales or rental lot occupational tax certificate and business license. To become licensed as a motor vehicle sales or rental lot again, all of the necessary requirements and physical improvements described herein must be met. A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted to ensure compliance. 
M.  No loud or boisterous noises, including outdoor public-address systems, shall emanate from the business, either by persons congregating there or by the playing of recording instruments, radios, and/or television sets or other sound-producing equipment. 
N.  All motor vehicle repairs shall take place inside an enclosed building. No motor vehicle repair work shall occur outside of an enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.39: - MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP 

4.39.001. - Motor vehicle repair shop. 
The term "motor vehicle" as used in this section is defined as any self-propelled vehicle required by the state to be titled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, trailer coaches and trailers, and weighing over 2,500 pounds. No motor vehicle repair shop shall be located in any zone other than C-2 and M-l. 
A.  The lot of record must be a minimum of one acre in order to operate a motor vehicle repair shop. 
B.  The applicant shall submit to the city planning department written detailed site plans and landscaping plans for the property to be used including method proposed for improvement, drainage, parking and display areas, driveways for ingress and egress, signage and buildings to be built or existing buildings to be used in the operation of the business. Off-street parking spaces, site plans, landscaping and buffers, and signage shall be in accordance with the requirements for the applicable zoning district in which the property use is located. 
C.  A repair shop building shall be provided and shall meet all requirements of the current building code as adopted by the City of Commerce. 
D.  Setback. An off-street pavement setback from public thoroughfares shall be maintained for the safety of customers. The setback shall be a minimum of five feet from the parking lot pavement to the right-of-way or, on corner lots, five feet from the parking lot pavement to the right-of-way along both rights-of-way. Within this setback area, a landscaped strip of at least five feet wide, which shall not include a sidewalk or trail, shall be located between the vehicular area and the public right-of-way, except where driveways cross the property line. Notwithstanding the above, no vehicles may be displayed or parked on the public right-of-way. 
E.  Surface pavement. All surface area for motor vehicle traffic and/or parking shall be an asphalt or concrete surface which shall be maintained in good condition and free of damage. In no event shall vehicles be parked on grass or unprepared surfaces. 
F.  Required parking spaces for customers shall be designated separately from those areas used repaired motor vehicles. 
G.  Turn-around. An adequate turn-around area shall be provided so that vehicles shall not back out into traffic from the property. 
H.  Disabled or damaged vehicles shall not be permitted to remain in an exterior location unless screened from public view. Screened areas shall only be allowed in areas to the rear of the principal structure of the dealership. Screening fences shall be provided on any property line that abuts any right-of-way and any adjoining property. 
I.  Any change in business ownership or discontinuance in the use of the property for the purpose of a motor vehicle sales lot shall cancel the motor vehicle sales lot occupational tax certificate and business license. To become licensed as a motor vehicle sales lot again, all of the necessary requirements and physical improvements described herein must be met. A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted to ensure compliance. 
J.  No loud or boisterous noises, including outdoor public-address systems, shall emanate from the business, either by persons congregating there or by the playing of recording instruments, radios, and/or television sets or other sound-producing equipment. 
K.  All motor vehicle repairs shall take place inside the repair shop building. No motor vehicle repairs shall occur outside of the repair shop building. 
L.  Motor vehicle repair shops shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital or on a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential zoning district or use. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.40: - RESTAURANTS WITH OUTDOOR DINING 

4.40.001. - Restaurants with outdoor dining. 
Outdoor dining for restaurant service is permitted subject to the following standards: 
A.  Outdoor dining areas are allowed in the front or side yard of the subject property. In order for there to be outdoor dining to the rear of the building, there must be a public entrance from the rear of the building. 
B.  The perimeter of the outdoor dining area shall be delineated using non-permanent fixtures such as railings, potted plants, decorative chains, or other similar decorative fixtures other than signs and that do not present a public health or safety hazard. 
C.  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, canopies, awnings and any other fixtures shall be of uniform design and shall be made of quality materials and workmanship to ensure the safety and convenience of users and to enhance the visual quality of the urban environment. Design, materials and colors shall be compatible with any applicable design guidelines. 
D.  Outdoor dining abutting a public sidewalk shall be subject to the following additional development standards: 
(1)  A minimum of one unobstructed pedestrian path at least four feet wide shall be maintained to connect the building entrances to the curb line of the abutting street. 
(2)  A minimum setback of at least two feet from the curb line shall be provided adjacent to on street parking spaces in order to maintain adequate space for pedestrian access to motor vehicles. 
(3)  The city may at any time require the removal of the outdoor seating abutting a public sidewalk when street, sidewalk, or utility repairs necessitate such action or when it is necessary to clear sidewalks for other events permitted by the city. The owner/proprietor of the restaurant shall not be entitled to any refund for such removal and the city shall not be responsible for any costs associated with the removal or return and installation of any outdoor seating fixtures. 
(4)  The city may cause the immediate removal or relocation of all or any part of outdoor seating abutting public sidewalks in emergency situations. The city, its officers, agents and employees shall not be responsible for any damages or loss of outdoor seating fixtures relocated during emergency situations and shall not be responsible for any costs associated with the removal or the return and installation of any outdoor seating fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
CHAPTER 4.41: - MOBILE FOOD UNIT 

4.41.001. - Mobile food unit. 
A.  Any person conducting business from a mobile food unit shall apply for and receive an occupational tax certificate from the city or a temporary outdoor event permit from the city. 
B.  Mobile food units are required to have a commissary (base of operation) and provide that information to the city in order to receive a permit. 
C.  Mobile food units are required to obtain and maintain a permit from the Jackson County Board of Health—Division of Environmental Health and to abide by their regulations for operation. Mobile food units must display such permit on demand by the city. 
D.  Any such mobile food unit operating on private property shall obtain the written consent of the owner to use the property for such sales. 
E.  Mobile food units may only be located on a lot containing a principal building or use. 
F.  Mobile food units must be located at least 100 feet from the main entrance of any restaurant and at least 100 feet from any outdoor dining area serving a restaurant. 
G.  Mobile food units may not obstruct pedestrian, bicycle or vehicle circulation routes, and must be set back at least five feet from the edge of any driveway or public sidewalk and at least 15 feet from fire hydrants. 
H.  Mobile food units and any associated seating areas may not occupy parking spaces provided to meet the minimum parking requirements of the principal use, unless the principal use's hours of operation do not coincide with those of the mobile food unit business. Mobile food units may not occupy any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities. 
I.  Power sources must meet applicable local and state electric codes. 
J.  Ventilation hoods require inspection and approval of the Commerce fire marshal. 
K.  Hours of operation of mobile food units are limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
L.  Mobile food units and associated outdoor seating must be removed from all permitted locations when not in operation. 
M.  Operators are responsible for ensuring that all waste is disposed of in accordance with city regulations and for maintaining all areas used for food vending and customer activity in a safe and clean condition. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, 6-4-18) 
Article 5: - ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 5.01: - AMENDMENT 

5.01.001. - Authority. 
The mayor and council may from time to time amend the boundaries of the districts established on the official zoning map and/or the provisions in this ordinance. Such amendments require a public hearing by the planning commission. 
5.01.002. - Application for amendment (Rezoning application). 
An application for amendment must be filed with the city clerk at least 45 days prior the planning commission meeting at which the request will be heard. An application for amendment must contain the following information: 
A.  A survey of the property prepared by a licensed surveyor showing existing and proposed structures and uses, access drives, easements, utilities, buffers, existing zoning, and any other supporting documentation required by the city clerk to assist the planning commission and mayor and council in rendering a decision, including concept plans; 
B.  A list of adjoining property owners as shown on the tax rolls; 
C.  Any additional information the applicant or the city clerk believes to be pertinent. 
D.  Additionally, the applicant, if other than the local government, must pay the required application fee, as determined by the mayor and council, to cover the administrative and adverting costs of the application and sign a statement certifying he/she or the owner represented by the applicant has at least a 51 percent ownership interest in the property. 
E.  Once the application is submitted it cannot be amended. Incomplete applications will not be processed. 
F.  The zoning administrator shall present the application and all its supporting documents, along with a written analysis of the requested zoning's impact, to the planning commission at its regular business meeting the month in which the public hearing on the application is scheduled. The written analysis shall show that the zoning administrator has considered the proposed change in relation to the following, where applicable. 
1.  What is the existing land use pattern in the area? 
2.  Would approval create an isolated district designation unrelated to adjacent and nearby district designations? 
3.  Would approval significantly increase or possibly overtax available infrastructure including, but not limited to schools, streets, and public safety services? 
4.  Are the existing boundaries illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions on the property proposed for change? 
5.  Would changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment necessary? 
6.  Will the proposed change adversely influence living conditions in the neighborhood? 
7.  Will the proposed change create or excessively increase traffic congestion or otherwise affect public safety? 
8.  Will the proposed change seriously reduce light and air to adjacent areas? 
9.  Will the proposed change adversely affect property values in the adjacent area? 
10.  Will the proposed change be a deterrent to the improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations? 
11.  Will the proposed change constitute a grant of special privilege to an individual owner as contrasted with the public welfare? 
12.  Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with its existing zoning? 
13.  To what extent is the proposed change consistent with the city's Comprehensive Plan? 
14.  What other factors, if any, should be considered in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety morality or general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of the property? 
5.01.003. - Public hearings, procedures, and rezoning standards. 
A.  Public hearing required. Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, one public hearing must be held by the planning commission. 
B.  Applicant notification. The city clerk must notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearing. 
C.  Publication of notice. Not less than 15 days, and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the city clerk shall advertise the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Commerce. The notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. The notice shall further include a statement that 
"Any opponent of a zoning action that has made within two years immediately proceeding the filing of the zoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official that will consider the application, must file a disclosure with the planning commission showing: 
1.  The name and official position of the city official to whom the contribution was made; and, 
2.  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made to the city official. 
The disclosure shall be filed at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing on the zoning application." 
D.  Sign. In addition to the newspaper notice and not less than 15 days prior to the planning commission public hearing, the city clerk shall have posted in a conspicuous place on the lot or parcel to be rezoned, one or more signs, which shall provide adequate notice of the zoning action. Each sign shall be approximately 32 inches in height and 24 inches in width and shall provide adequate notice of the zoning action. At a minimum the sign must contain the following information: date, time, and location or the hearing, current zoning classification and proposed zoning classification, and a telephone number interested persons can call for additional information. 
If, because of circumstances peculiar to the location of the property to be posted, the sign will either be inconspicuous or invisible from any well-traveled right-of-way, the sign(s) shall be posted on the property to be rezoned and on other property in such a location that it is likely to be seen by persons potentially interested in the decision. 
E.  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with section 5.01.005. After the hearing, the planning commission shall consider the zoning amendment criteria of section 5.01.004 and make recommendation to the mayor and council on the application. The planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, table for further action, or deny the application. The planning commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the mayor and council. If, however, the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within 35 days after its hearing, the planning commission shall be deemed to have recommended approval. 
F.  Mayor and council action. The mayor and council shall review the record, consider the zoning amendment criteria of section 5.01.004, and vote on the application. The council may approve, approve with conditions, table for further action, deny the application, or return the application to the planning commission for further consideration. Within seven days of its decision, the city clerk shall so notify the applicant in writing. If the mayor and council fail to act on the application within 60 days of its submission or by its next regularly scheduled meeting, whichever is later, the application is deemed to have been approved unless the application is tabled, postponed, or withdrawn. 
G.  Withdrawal. If an application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance or official zoning map is withdrawn in writing by the applicant at any time after the publication of the newspaper notice and posting of the required sign, but prior to the public hearing, then the same property may not be considered for zoning by the planning commission until the expiration of at least 60 days immediately following the withdrawal of the application. The withdrawal must be in writing and signed by the applicant. 
If the applicant withdraws the application at any time after the public hearing then the same property may not be considered for zoning by the planning commission until the expiration of at least 60 days immediately following the withdrawal of the application. If withdrawal occurs after the public hearing, the withdrawal shall be noted on mayor and council agenda. The withdrawal must be in writing and signed by the applicant. 
The application will be considered to have been withdrawn if the applicant, his/her authorized agent or his/her attorney fails to appear at the planning commission hearing. 
H.  Denial. If the zoning ordinance amendment or official zoning map amendment is denied by the mayor and council, then the same property may not be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the rezoning. 
5.01.004. - Zoning amendment criteria. 
In the adoption of a zoning ordinance, an amendment to an existing zoning ordinance or amendment to the official zoning map, the planning commission and mayor and council shall consider factors relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morals or general welfare against the right of the individual to the unrestricted use of property and must specifically consider the following factors as they may be relevant to the application: 
A.  The existing land use pattern; 
B.  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
C.  The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets; 
D.  The cost to the city and other governmental entities in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and other public safety measures; 
E.  The possible impact on the environment, including but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality; 
F.  Whether the proposed zoning map amendment will be a deterrent to the value or improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
G.  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing regulations; 
H.  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
I.  The extent to which the proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
J.  The possible effect of the proposed zoning map amendment on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community; 
K.  The relation that the proposed zoning map amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme, with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry out the purposes of these zoning regulations; 
L.  The consideration of the preservation of the integrity of residential neighborhoods shall be considered to carry great weight; 
M.  In those instances in which property fronts on a major thoroughfare and also adjoins an established residential neighborhood, the factor of preservation of the residential area shall be considered to carry great weight. 
After hearing evidence at the zoning hearing, the planning commission and mayor and council shall apply the evidence of the standards of review (zoning amendment criteria) in making their decision. It will not be required that the planning commission and mayor and council consider every criterion contained in the standards of review. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed zoning map amendment promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
5.01.005. - Procedure for conducting a public hearing. 
All public hearings held pursuant to this ordinance shall be conducted as follows: 
A.  Public hearings shall be chaired by the chairperson of the planning commission or his designee. 
B.  The city clerk shall record the proceedings of the public hearing. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party. 
C.  The record of the public hearing and all evidence submitted at the public hearing shall be recorded and shall become a permanent part of the application file. 
D.  The presiding officer shall allow the zoning administrator to present an overview of the application. Following this presentation, the applicant or the applicant's agent or attorney shall be allowed to present the applicant's case and then shall be afforded an opportunity, prior to the closing of the public hearing, to answer questions and respond to objections of others in attendance. A minimum of ten minutes is allowed for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion by proponents of each zoning decision and a minimum of ten minutes is allowed for presentation by opponents of each proposed zoning decision. 
E.  Others desiring to speak or make a statement shall be given reasonable opportunity to do so but must first be recognized by the presiding officer. Upon rising to speak, the person recognized will state his/her name. The presiding officer may also request that the person furnish a home or business street address, as may be appropriate. 
F.  Groups, affiliations, and associations shall designate a spokesperson who shall speak for the group. 
G.  Both proponents and opponents of the matter under consideration shall be given comparable time and opportunity by the presiding officer to speak. 
H.  Questions shall be directed only to the presiding officer who shall respond or designate another person for the response. 
I.  The presiding officer may limit or terminate the discussion, statements or comments because of time, repetitiveness or irrelevancy. 
J.  After all discussion concerning the zoning application is concluded, the presiding officer shall close the public hearing for that particular zoning application, and shall address each zoning criteria listed in section 5.01.004, and make recommendation to the mayor and council. 
5.01.006. - Evaluation criteria. 
The same criteria shall be used to evaluate and determine if changes proposed by the mayor and council are to be recommended. 
5.01.007. - Publication of standards. 
The above criteria shall be available to the public to aid in the preparation for a change in the zoning ordinance or the official zoning map of Commerce, Georgia. 
CHAPTER 5.02: - CONDITIONAL USE 

5.02.001. - Application for conditional use. 
All applications for conditional use shall be filed with the city clerk at least 45 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the request will be heard. An application for conditional use must contain the following information: 
A.  Three copies of a written description of the proposal designed to inform the city, in detail, about all aspects of the proposed use and its anticipated impact on the community. The description should include, when pertinent, information on the hours of operation, number of employees, number of dwelling units, vehicle trip ends, noise, water usage, sanitary waste treatment and any other relevant concerns identified by the city or applicant. 
B.  Three copies of preliminary building and site plans drawn to scale showing the following information: 
1.  Surveyed plat signed by a registered surveyor. 
2.  Project name. 
3.  Project owner. 
4.  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
5.  Vicinity map. 
6.  Use of adjacent property. 
7.  Exterior dimensions of the site. 
8.  Total project acreage. 
9.  Location, name and width of all existing or proposed streets. 
10.  Location of all proposed structures. 
11.  Location of all off-street parking and driveway serving the project. 
12.  Proposed buffers and/or screening. 
13.  Location, height, fixture type and wattage of site lighting. 
14.  Dumpster locations. 
15.  Rough floor plans, including gross floor area. 
16.  Building height. 
Additionally, the applicant, if other than the local government, must pay the required application fee, as determined by the mayor and council, to cover the administrative and advertising costs of the application and sign a statement certifying he/she or the owner represented by the applicant has at least a 51 percent ownership interest in the property. 
Once the application is submitted, it cannot be amended. Incomplete applications will not be processed. 
5.02.002. - Public hearing required. 
Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, one public hearing must be held by the planning commission. 
5.02.003. - Applicant notification and publication of notice. 
The city clerk shall cause the applicant to be notified and notice to be published and the property to be posted in accordance with subsections 5.01.003(B), (C), and (D). 
5.02.004. - Zoning administrator review. 
The zoning administrator shall present the application and all its supporting documents, along with a written analysis of the requested zoning's impact, to the planning commission at its regular business meeting the month in which the public hearing on the application is scheduled. The written analysis shall show that the zoning administrator has considered the proposed change in relation to the enumerated questions in subsection 5.01.002(F). 
5.02.005. - Planning commission action. 
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed use in accordance with section 5.01.005. After the hearing, the planning commission shall consider the zoning amendment criteria in section 5.01.004 and make recommendation to the mayor and council. The planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, table for further action, or deny the application. The planning commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the mayor and council. If, however, the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within 35 days after its hearing, the planning commission shall be deemed to have recommended approval. 
5.02.006. - Mayor and council action. 
The mayor and council shall review the record, consider the zoning amendment criteria of section 5.01.004 and vote on the application. The council may approve, approve with conditions, deny the application, table for further action, or return the application to the planning commission for further review. Within seven days of its decision, the city clerk shall so notify the applicant in writing. If the mayor and council fail to act on the application within 60 days of its submission or by its next regularly scheduled meeting, whichever is later, the application is deemed to have been approved unless the application is tabled, postponed, or withdrawn. 
Unless otherwise noted, the site plan submitted in support of an approved conditional use shall be considered part of the approval and must be followed. 
Approval of a proposed use by the mayor and council does not constitute an approval for future expansion of or additions or changes to the initially approved operation. All uses, construction or building approved in the conditional use must begin within 60 days of approval of the mayor and council and be fully completed within one year of approval. 
CHAPTER 5.03: - VARIANCE 

5.03.001. - Application for variance. 
Where the owner of a plot of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots of record at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him/her to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this ordinance; or if the topography, physical shape, or other unique features of such lots of record, prevent reasonable compliance with the setback if used as a building site, then the property owner or agent or representative may make application to the board of zoning appeals for a variance. Under no circumstances may conditions be granted for a lot that is created or subdivided after enactment of this ordinance. 
All applications for variance shall be submitted to the city clerk at least 45 days prior to a regularly scheduled board of zoning appeals meeting on application forms supplied by the city clerk along with a fee as determined by mayor and council. Incomplete applications will not be placed on the agenda. Applications for variance must be accompanied by the following information: 
A.  Three copies of a written description of the proposal designed to inform the city, in detail, about all aspects of the proposed use and its anticipated impact on the community. The description should include, when pertinent, information on the hours of operation, number of employees, number of dwelling units, vehicle trip ends, noise, water usage, sanitary waste treatment and any other relevant concerns identified by the city or applicant. 
B.  Three copies of preliminary building and site plans drawn to scale showing the following information: 
1.  Surveyed plat signed by a registered surveyor. 
2.  Project name. 
3.  Project owner. 
4.  Date, scale, and north arrow. 
5.  Vicinity map. 
6.  Use of adjacent property. 
7.  Exterior dimensions of the site. 
8.  Total project acreage. 
9.  Location, name and width of all existing or proposed streets. 
10.  Location of all proposed structures 
11.  Location of all off-street parking and driveway serving the project. 
12.  Proposed buffers and/or screening. 
13.  Location, height, fixture type and wattage of site lighting. 
14.  Dumpster locations. 
15.  Rough floor plans, including gross floor area. 
16.  Building height. 
Additionally, the applicant, if other than the local government, must pay the required application fee, as determined by the mayor and council, to cover the administrative and advertising costs of the application and sign a statement certifying he/she or the owner represented by the applicant has at least a 51 percent ownership interest in the property. 
Once the application is submitted, it cannot be amended. Incomplete applications will not be processed. 
5.03.002. - Public hearing required. 
Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, one public hearing must be held by the board of zoning appeals. 
5.03.003. - Applicant notification and publication of notice. 
The city clerk shall cause notice to be published and the property to be posted in accordance with subsection 5.01.003(5)(C) and (D). 
5.03.004. - Zoning administrator review. 
The zoning administrator shall present the application and all its supporting documents, along with a written analysis of the requested variance's impact, to the board of zoning appeals at its regular business meeting the month in which the public hearing on the application is scheduled. The written analysis shall show that the zoning administrator has considered the proposed change in relation to the enumerated questions in subsection 5.01.002(F). 
5.03.005. - Public hearing and action. 
The board of zoning appeals shall hold a public hearing on the proposed use in accordance with section 5.01.005. After the hearing, the board of zoning appeals shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, table for further action, or denial of the application. Within seven days of its decision, the city clerk shall so notify the applicant in writing. If the board of zoning appeals fails to act on the application within 60 days of its submission, the application is deemed to have been recommended for approval unless the application is tabled, postponed, or withdrawn. The application shall be presented to the city council within 30 days from the final recommendation of the board of zoning appeals. 
A.  The city council may grant variances only upon finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
2.  The application of this ordinance to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
3.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this ordinance; and 
4.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property; and 
5.  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicants; and 
6.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures, which is not permitted by right or by conditional use permit in the zoning district involved. 
The yard and other space requirements of the zoning district, which the property is located, may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit reasonable use of the property as a building site. Such reduction of these space requirements shall constitute a variance. However, in no case shall the city council permit any lot in a residential zoning district to be used as a building site which isles than 75 percent of the zoning district's minimum area and yard requirements as set forth in [chapter] 2.03. 
B.  In granting a variance, the city council may impose any other conditions necessary to further the goals of this ordinance. 
C.  The city council may establish performance bonds to assure compliance with any requirements it has set for granting a variance. Where a variance is granted for a construction activity requiring a building permit, the building permit must be obtained and construction must begin within six months of the issuance of the variance. Otherwise, the variance expires after six months. 
D.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city council on an application for a variance may petition the Jackson County Superior Court for a Writ of Certiorari within ten days of the decision of the city council. 
E.  If the variance request is denied, then the same property may not be considered for a variance for at least six months immediately following the denial of the variance by the city council. 
CHAPTER 5.04: - NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 
The elimination of existing buildings and structures or uses that do not conform with this ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this ordinance. It is also the intent of this ordinance to administer the elimination of non-conforming uses, buildings, and structures so as to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. 
Any structure or use of land lawfully existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance and its amendments, but not in conformity with its use ordinances and provisions may be continued subject to the following provisions. 

5.04.001. - Unsafe structures. 
Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by an appropriate governing authority may be restored to a safe condition, provided the requirements of section 5.04.004 are met. 
5.04.002. - Alterations. 
Any change in a lawfully existing non-conforming building, use, building site or yard area is subject to the following: 
A.  No lawfully existing non-conforming building, can be structurally altered, except repairs on the building or installation of plumbing fixtures required by law, changing of interior partitions, or interior remodeling. Improvements on a lawfully existing non-conforming building shall not exceed 50 percent of the value of the building as determined by the building official. 
B.  No lawfully existing non-conforming building or lands, except those residential dwellings needing repairs on the building or installation of plumbing fixtures as required by law, can be substantially added to, moved, or extended in any manner unless such building or land is changed to conform with the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  If a lawfully existing non-conforming building is moved, all non-conforming minimum yard requirements, as defined in section 2.03.002 or elsewhere in this ordinance, must be eliminated. 
D.  Whenever an owner of a lawfully existing residential dwelling must make repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures which will force the location of the future addition of the dwelling nearer the lot line than permitted, the addition to the dwelling shall be allowed to extend to the existing building line but no nearer the property line than any existing portion of the dwelling. 
5.04.003. - Extension. 
A lawfully existing non-conforming use is restricted to the lot occupied by such use as of the effective date of this ordinance. A non-conforming use must not be extended to include either additional building or land, except as permitted in [chapter] 5.04, or unless the owner applies for and is granted a variance. 
5.04.004. - Restoration of damaged buildings. 
Unless otherwise specified, a lawfully existing non-conforming structure that is destroyed (damage equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structures' replacement value, as determined by the building official), through no intent of the owner, may not be reconstructed or restored to the same non-conforming use except upon approval of the zoning administrator. However, residential dwellings that are nonconforming because of area and minimum yard requirements may be replaced regardless of extent of damage. 
5.04.005. - Discontinuance. 
A lawfully existing non-conforming use which became such after the adoption of this ordinance and which has been discontinued for a continuous period of six months, shall not be reestablished and any future use shall be in conformance with this ordinance. Where government action impedes access to land, the time of any resulting discontinuance of a non-conforming use shall not be counted towards the time periods of this section. 
CHAPTER 5.05: - ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
The zoning administrator is hereby given the authority and responsibility to act as the code enforcement officer and to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The zoning administrator does not have the authority to take final action on applications or matters reserved for public hearings. The zoning administrator shall keep records of all permits, the certificates of occupancy issued, and all submitted subdivision plats, with notations of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be made available as public records. 
CHAPTER 5.06: - PERMITS 

5.06.001. - Building permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any building to be located, erected, moved, or added to, or structurally without obtaining a building permit issued by the building official. No building permit shall be issued except in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.06.002. - Application for permits. 
A.  An application shall be accompanied by two copies of a dimensional sketch or a to-schedule plan, signed by the owner, or his authorized agent, to include, as a minimum, the following: 
1.  Lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; 
2.  Shape, size, height, and location of the buildings proposed to be erected, demolished, altered, or moved, and of any buildings already on the lot, yard dimensions and use of structures, including the number of dwelling units within each structure where appropriate; 
3.  Easements (private and public); 
4.  Water courses; 
5.  Fences; 
6.  Street names and street right-of-way lines; and 
7.  Such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application. 
B.  Each permit shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises described in the permit during the period of construction or reconstruction. 
1.  If the proposed excavation, filling, construction, or movement set forth in said sketch or plan are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, and other appropriate codes and ordinances in effect, the building official shall sign and return one copy of the sketch plan to the applicant and shall issue a building permit. The building official shall retain one copy of the building permit and one copy of the sketch or plan for his records. 
2.  If the sketch or plan submitted describes work which does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance, the building official shall not issue a building permit but shall return one copy of the sketch of plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal and shall cite the portions of these ordinances with which the submitted sketch plan does not comply. The building official shall retain one copy of the sketch plan and two copies of the refusal. 
3.  Any building permit shall automatically expire six months from the date of issuance if the person, firm, or corporation to which the certificate or permit was issued has not clearly demonstrated that the permit is being exercised for the purpose for which it was issued, or if the work so authorized is suspended or discontinued for a period of one year. 
5.06.003. - Issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy is required before a structure for which a building permit has been issued, may be occupied or used. The certificate of occupancy must be signed by the building official and attest that to the best of his knowledge all requirements of this ordinance have been met. The owner/contractor will then receive the certificate of occupancy to be used as confirmation that he has complied with the provision of this ordinance. 
The zoning administrator will issue the certificate of occupancy upon notification by the building official that all applicable building codes and other uniform development standards and ordinances have been met. However, if the building official finds that all requirements of such ordinances have not yet been met when the owner/contractor seeks a certificate of occupancy, the zoning administrator will not issue the certificate of occupancy. The zoning administrator will notify the owner/contractor in writing within ten days, stating the reasons for the refusal. The owner/contractor will then need to confer with the building official to determine what he needs to do in order to comply with the ordinance and be eligible for a certificate of occupancy. 
5.06.004. - Remedies. 
In the event any building is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator of Commerce, Georgia, is authorized and required to institute injunction, mandamus, warrant for arrest, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate the violation in the case of each building or land use. The zoning administrator is the zoning enforcement officer. Any person who would be damaged by such violation may also institute action to prevent or abate the violation. 
CHAPTER 5.07: - DEVELOPMENTS OF REGIONAL IMPACT 
The Georgia Planning Act of 1989 authorized the department of community affairs to establish procedures for regional review of development projects that are of sufficient size that they are likely to create impacts beyond the jurisdiction in which the project will be located. The DRI review process involves the host local government, the reviewing regional development center (RDC), and other potentially affected local governments, RDC's and agencies. 
Thresholds are used to determine whether a proposed development is a DRI. Because positive and negative impacts of DRI's are not necessarily confined to the host local governments' jurisdictional boundaries, impacts on other jurisdictions need to be assessed. 
If a development project is submitted to the planning commission for review, then the time deadlines imposed in by this ordinance are suspended until the DRI review process is completed. 
CHAPTER 5.08: - MAP AMENDMENT 
If, in accordance with provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in the zoning district boundaries or other information portrayed in the official zoning map, such changes must be made on the official zoning map within 30 days after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and commission together with a numerical entry on the official zoning map referring to the application on file which states the date of the official action and the brief description of the nature of the changes. No amendment to this ordinance which involves a matter portrayed on the official zoning map is effective until after such change and entry is made on the map. 
All changes made to the official zoning map or matters shown thereon must be in conformity with the procedures set forth in this zoning ordinance. Any unauthorized change by any person is considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided by law and this ordinance. 
CHAPTER 5.09: - DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 

5.09.001. - Disclosure of financial interests. 
A city official who knows or reasonably should know he or she: 
A.  Has a property interest in any real property affected by a zoning action upon which that official's local government will have the duty to consider. 
B.  Has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by a zoning action which that official's local government will have the duty to consider; or 
C.  Has a member of the family having any interest described in subsection (A) or (B) of this section, shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the planning commission or mayor and council, as appropriate. 
D.  Regularly conducts business with the applicant or has conducted business relative to the zoning action. 
The city official who has an interest as defined in subsection (A) or (B) of this section, shall disqualify himself from voting on the zoning action. The disqualified city official shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or any other person to influence action on the application for zoning. Disclosures provided for in the section shall be a public record and available for public inspection at any time during normal working hours. 
5.09.002. - Disclosure of campaign contributions. 
A.  When any owner or applicant for zoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's application for the zoning action, campaign contribution(s) aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the planning commission or mayor and council, as appropriate, showing: 
1.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
2.  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant or owner to the city official during the two years immediately proceeding the filing of the application for the zoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
B.  The required disclosures shall be filed within five calendar days after the application for the rezoning action is first filed. 
C.  Any person knowingly failing to comply with the disclosure requirements or violating the provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
CHAPTER 5.10: - LAND USE PLAN COORDINATION AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCESSES PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 36-70-24(4)(A) AND (C) OF THE SERVICE DELIVERY STRATEGY ACT - H.B. 489 

5.10.001. - H.B. 489. 
H.B. 489 states that: 
"Local governments within the same county shall, if necessary, amend their land use plans so that such plans are compatible and nonconflicting, or as an alternative, they shall adopt a single land use plan for the unincorporated areas of the county." 
"A process must be established by July 1, 1998, to resolve land use classification disputes when a county objects to the proposed land use of an area to be annexed into a municipality within the county." 
5.10.002. - Process to be adopted by Jackson County and its municipalities. 
A.  General standard process. 
1.  Each municipality within Jackson County shall establish a "Municipal Sphere of Influence" by June 30, 1999. Each municipality shall design their respective "Sphere of Influence" to include those unincorporated areas served by the municipality's utilities (primarily water and sewer) for a distance of one-quarter mile on each side of the water and/or sewer line. The county's "Sphere of Influence" shall include all unincorporated areas and shall also include any parcel of land within a municipality which has a portion of its boundary adjoining and contiguous to an unincorporated area or a portion of its boundary separated from an unincorporated area only by public road right-of-way or a railroad right-of-way. By definition, the county/municipal "Sphere of Influence" shall also include all development proposals which shall qualify as a Development of Regional Impact, as defined by the department of community affairs. In the interim (until each city established their "Sphere of Influence"), each municipality's "Sphere of Influence" shall extend 0.5 miles from their city boundary into the unincorporated county. 
2.  Since, Jackson County and its municipalities adopted their Joint Comprehensive Plans in 1998 and there were no "land use" objections, the future land use plans for the county and cities are hereby agreed to be acceptable as they are currently mapped. However, beginning in 1999, each Municipality and the county shall update their official existing and future land use maps/plans for the areas encompassed by the county/municipal "Spheres of Influence" on at least a biennial basis. All proposed major changes to the official land use plans of the municipalities and the county shall be reviewed jointly by all jurisdictions adjoining the "Spheres of Influence". If any conflicts or issues are identified by such review then a meeting will be required to occur between the elected officials or their designees to discuss and resolve land use objections. In the event that objections are not mitigated then the objections of the adjoining jurisdictions shall be noted on the official land use plan of each jurisdiction. 
3.  The county and municipalities shall provide notice of all zoning and annexation applications filed within their respective county/municipal "Spheres of Influence" to all jurisdictions adjoining their "Sphere of Influence". If a jurisdiction does not have land use regulations, said jurisdiction will provide notice to all affected jurisdictions of any development activities in the jurisdiction's respective "Sphere of Influence" that will deviate from the updated "land use" plan. 
B.  Process for annexations. 
1.  Within ten days of receipt of an annexation request and prior to approval of the annexation request, the municipality shall notify the chairman of the county commission and the county director of planning and development and shall notify the city mayor and city clerk whose "Sphere of Influence" covers the parcel of land to be annexed by giving notice by certified mail of a proposed annexation request. This notification should include, at a minimum, the schedule of public hearings, and information on the location of the property, size of area, current and proposed land use classification(s), current and proposed zoning of the property upon annexation. The county/city will have ten days from receipt of the city's notice to respond to the city's annexation notice. If the county/city has no objections to the city's proposed land use or zoning classification or if the county/city fails to reposed to the city's notice, the city is free to proceed with the annexation. Once the county/city accepts the city's original proposal for annexation or fails to respond to the city's original notice, the county/city loses its right to invoke the dispute resolution process or stop the annexation. 
2.  If the county/city has a bona fide land use classification objection(s) to the proposed annexation, such objection(s) shall be sent certified mail to the city clerk. The term 'bona fide land use classification objection' means an objection to a proposed change in land use which results in a substantial change in the intensity of the allowable use of the property or a change to a significantly different allowable use. 
3.  Once notice is received from the county/city that "land use" objections(s) have been raised, a meeting is required to occur within 20 days of receipt of the objection notice between the parties to mitigate and resolve land use objections. 
4.  In the event that the "land use" objections are not resolved, a disinterested third party will mediate to resolve any land use objections that exist to the proposed annexation. If mediation fails to produce an agreement within 40 days of receipt of the objection notice, the city will not proceed with the proposed annexation unless authorized by the court order. The cost of mediation will be shared by the participating jurisdictions. If mediation is unsuccessful, the city may file a declaration judgement action seeking permission to annexation. 
5.  Once a parcel of land has been annexed and zoned, a 12-month waiting period shall be required before another rezoning application can be submitted for the same parcel of land. 
6.  The dispute resolution process shall become effective on June 30, 1998, and shall be reviewed and readopted as part of the service delivery strategy on or before June 30, 1999. 
7.  Any of the parties who are participants of the service delivery strategy pursuant to the Service Delivery Strategies Act may call for a review and possible revision of this process. In no case shall the process be reviewed more than once in a 12- month period. 
C.  Process for rezonings. 
1.  Within ten days upon receipt of a rezoning or initial confirmation of development activities that will occur and deviate from the updated land use plan (for those jurisdictions that do not zoning), the municipality/county shall notify the chairman of the county commission and the director of planning and development and/or the adjoining city mayor and city clerk by giving notice by certified mail of a proposed rezoning request. 
If the city utilizes the joint city/county planning commission notification shall not be required to the county. (County staff processes rezoning requests for cities that utilize the joint city/county planning commission and therefore would already be informed.) Notification should include, at a minimum, the schedule of public hearings, and information on the location of the property, size of area, and current and proposed land use classification(s) and current and proposed zoning classifications of the property. 
2.  If the county/city objects to a rezoning proposal in their "Sphere of Influence" by another jurisdiction, such objections shall be sent certified mail to the county/city clerk of the respective governing body prior to the rezoning public hearing. 
3.  Once notice is received from the county/city that "land use" and/or "rezoning" objection(s) have been raised, a meeting is required to occur within ten days from the receipt of the objection between the parties to mitigate and resolve "land use" and/or "rezoning" objections. 
4.  If rezoning objections are not resolved prior to the public hearing, the county/city objections shall be read or entered into the record of the formal public hearing prior to final action being taken on the proposed rezoning. The entering of the county/city "land use" and/or "rezoning" objections into the official record and formal action of the governing body shall, if necessary, constitute the final resolution of the rezoning dispute resolution process. 
5.  Once a parcel of land has been zoned in the "Sphere of Influence", a six-month waiting period shall be required before another rezoning application can be submitted for the same parcel of land. 
6.  The dispute resolution process shall become effective on June 30, 1998, and shall be reviewed and readopted as part of the service delivery strategy on or before June 30, 1999. 
7.  If any of the parties who are participants of the service delivery strategy pursuant to the Service Delivery Strategies Act may call for a review and possible revision of this process. In no case shall the process be reviewed more than once in a 12-month period. 
Article 6: - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 6.01: - CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS 
When the provisions of this ordinance specify more restrictive standards than required by any other statute, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
CHAPTER 6.02: - SEPARABILITY 
Should any section or part of a section or any provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
CHAPTER 6.03: - REPEAL OF CONFLICT IN ORDINANCES 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. 
CHAPTER 6.04: - INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE OF MAPS 
The official zoning map(s) of Commerce, Georgia, are by incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this ordinance. The official map(s) shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
CHAPTER 6.05: - COPIES 
This Zoning Ordinance of Commerce, Georgia shall be and is hereby executed in triplicate, each signed copy being an original to be marked and distributed as follows. 

6.05.001. - City work copy. 
Shall be maintained in the zoning administrator's office for day to day use in zoning and planning. 
6.05.002. - Minute book original. 
Shall be incorporated into the minutes of the meeting of the mayor and council of commerce and maintained by the city clerk. The minute book original shall hereafter be deemed the original or official copy. Any subsequent amendment shall be made only by official action as prescribed herein. The original shall not be altered but amendments shall be identified on separate sheets each separately numbered and supported by the date and official action ordinance amendment in which the change was approved. In the case of a comprehensive amendment to the zoning ordinance, a copy of all proposed changes may be incorporated into one document. Since a comprehensive amendment may incorporate substantial material changes as well as insignificant technical changes, all substantial material changes must be made available to the public separate from the complete zoning ordinance and clearly identifiable. Substantial changes must be approved individually by the mayor and council. 
CHAPTER 6.06: - ENFORCEMENT 
If the zoning administrator or his/her assistant determines that any person is in violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator shall issue an order requiring the owner to comply with this ordinance including orders requiring restoration of pre-existing conditions and orders requiring restitution to the city by means that are deemed appropriate by the city. In addition, the city may bring a civil action for enforcement and may seek equitable and injunctive relief under this ordinance. 
Any person who is determined to be in violation of any provision of this ordinance by the city shall be fined a civil penalty of not less than $100.00 per day of violation and not more than $1,000.00 per day of violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in municipal court shall be punished by imprisonment of not more than six months or by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, for the first offense and by imprisonment of not more than one year or by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or both for each subsequent offense. Additionally, any violation of any provision of this ordinance of failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation by the zoning administrator of any and all related permits. 
CHAPTER 6.07: - APPEALS 

6.07.001. - From zoning administrator or building official. 
If the zoning administrator or building official executes an action which the aggrieved party believes to be contrary to this ordinance, that action may be appealed. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action by the zoning administrator or building official was taken. 
6.07.002. - Appeal application. 
The board of zoning appeals has jurisdiction for hearing appeals concerning actions of the zoning administrator or building official related to this ordinance. Applications for appeal may be obtained from and submitted to the city clerk, who will transmit them to the board of zoning appeals for its consideration. 
6.07.003. - Stopped work. 
When an action of the zoning administrator or building official is appealed, all construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action must be stopped immediately. In certain cases, however, the building official may feel that the stopping of such construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action will cause imminent peril to life or property. Then, the building official may certify the board of zoning appeals that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, the halting of construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, the construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action is allowed to continue unless the construction is halted by the board of zoning appeals or a restraining order is granted by a count of competent jurisdiction. 
6.07.004. - Public hearing. 
When an application for appeal of an action of the zoning administrator or building official is received, the board of zoning appeals will set a time and place for a public hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Commerce at least 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the parties to the appeal will be notified of the date of the hearing by the board of zoning appeals by certified mail with return receipt requested and postmarked at least 15 days before the hearing. Any person may appear at the hearing, or have a representative attend instead. 
6.07.005. - Board of zoning appeals action. 
The board of zoning appeals shall hold a public hearing on the matter in accordance with section 5.01.005. After the hearing, the board of zoning appeals may recommend granting the appeal or denying the appeal. Within seven days of its recommendation, the city clerk shall notify the appellant in writing. The recommendation of the board of zoning appeals shall be considered by the city council at its next regularly scheduled city council meeting and the city council will make a final determination regarding the appeal at such meeting. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may petition the Jackson County Superior Court for a writ of certiorari within ten days following the decision of the city council. 
CHAPTER 6.08: - SEVERABILITY 
Should any section or part of a section or any provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Appendix A - EXAMPLES OF LIGHT FIXTURES 

GOOD:   Even post-top ornamental fixtures, like this Salem Cutoff from GE Lighting, can be cutoff with clear panels and lamp/reflector located above. 

GOOD:   The Yorktown, another ornamental from Emery Fixtures, also has clear panels and bulb located above for maximum glare and spill light control. 

BAD:   Non-cutoff fixtures like this "acorn" ornamental cause light pollution. 

GOOD:   Flat-lens cobra head fixtures, like this American Electric Series 125 Roadway Cutoff luminary, provide excellent roadway lighting with greatly reduced glare and no uplight. 

GOOD:   This new generation of flat-lens cobra head fixture from American Electric, called the DuraStar 2000, provides superior lighting uniformity at standard mounting heights and spacings. 

BAD:   The ubiquitous drop-lens cobra head luminary produces a level of glare and uplight that is both unacceptable and unnecessary. 

GOOD:   Many existing dusk-to-dawn security lights and residential streetlights can be retrofitted with the Hubbell Skycap. 

GOOD:   The Hubbell Skycap turns any standard NEMA head light into a full cut-off light with wide area coverage. 

BAD:   NEMA head style fixtures are very inefficient, sending about 20% of the light upward and another 20% horizontally outward, creating glare. 

GOOD:   Flat-lens shoebox fixtures come in many forms: square, rectangular, circular, etc. All control the light with internal reflectors. Glare and light trespass are minimalized; no uplight is produced. 

GOOD:   Post-top flat-lens shoebox fixtures like this one provide good area illumination without light pollution. 

BAD:   (sometimes): The telltale sag lens gives this luminary as a possible problem. If the lens is clear and very shallow, and the bulb is not too high, this type of light can cover a wider area without too much glare or uplight, but beware! 

GOOD:   Full-cutoff wall packs such as this McPhilben 101 Wall Sconce make excellent entryway and building perimeter lights, and there is enough forward throw that adequate lighting is provided for near-building parking. 

GOOD:   Recessed canister lights built into the eaves or canopy of a house, garage, or other building is the first choice for lighting building exteriors. 

BAD:   Walls packs like this should never be used. They produce enormous glare and uplight. 

GOOD:   If floodlights must be used, they should always have top and side shielding, and be pointed at least 45;deg; below the horizontal. 

GOOD:   Even sports lighting can be done well if one uses cutoff light fixtures such as these from Soft Lighting Systems. 

BAD:   Unshielded floodlights provide a trashy "prison yard" look and should not be used. 
Appendix B - EXAMPLES OF SIGNS 

Figure 1 - Appropriate Sign Locations. 

Figure 2 - Preserve Historic Lighting Fixtures for Sign Illumination. 




Figure 17 - Sight Triangle at Street Intersection 

Figure 18 - Sight Triangle at Driveway or Alley 


Figure 22 - Sign Face Area = (A)(B)+(C)(D)+(E)(F)+(G)(0) 

Figure 23 - Sign Structure of Area = (X)(Y)-(A)(B) 
ZONING CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Zoning Code of those ordinances adopted since the 2001 Zoning Ordinance, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since the publication of the 2001 Zoning Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 