CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CAIRO, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1984 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF CAIRO, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adrian P. Clark 
Mayor 
____________ 
James H. LeGette 
Councilman-At-Large 
____________ 
Frank B. Cannon, Jr. 
Raymond F. Hurst 
David Stallings 
Richard Vanlandingham 
Council Members 
____________ 
Dan A. Wells 
City Manager 
____________ 
Edwin A. Carlisle 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Martha Faye Lewis 
City Clerk and Treasurer 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the city of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1965 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1965 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fifth section of chapter 9 is 9-5. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 2-4 and 2-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 2-4.1, 2-4.2 and 2-4.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 6 and 7 it will be designated as chapter 6.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and B. Meade White, Editor of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. John W. Walker, former City Manager, and Mr. Edwin A. Carlisle, City Attorney for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 283 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Cairo, Georgia; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Cairo, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 22 each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Cairo, Georgia," which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the city adopted on or before July 17, 1984, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 1985, and all conflicting provisions of ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before July 17, 1984, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of the Code. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision or such Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.00), and imprisonment of not more than sixty (60) days, or both, as provided in section 1-8 of such Code. 
Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the governing body to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 4 of this ordinance and in section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. Any ordinance adopted after July 17, 1984, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. The city clerk, from time to time, upon instructions from the mayor and council, shall insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the mayor and council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 9. It shall be unlawful for any person to change, or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Cairo to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 4 of this ordinance. 
Section 10. This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, shall take effect January 1, 1985. 
Adopted by roll call vote as follows: 
APPROVED: 
/s/ Adrian P. Clark, Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Martha Faye Lewis, Clerk 
Passed first reading twenty-sixth day of November, 1984. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To reincorporate and provide a new Charter for the City of Cairo in Grady County, Georgia; to provide for boundaries and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, qualifications, prohibitions, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for boards, commhissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, a city manager, and other personnel; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for taxation and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for purchases; to provide for the sale of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to provide for submission of this Act for preclearance under the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY  OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Cairo, Act. No. 633, passed by the General Asssembly on February 21, 2006, effective April 28, 2006. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged for the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Cairo in Grady County is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Cairo." References in this Charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Cairo. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in a manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Cairo, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace but such earlier maps shall be retained in the office of the city clerk. 
Section 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O. C. G. A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governments and entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, or prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, information/communication transmission systems, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties, and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, electrical, and communication distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city, for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge; and to impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvement; 
(37)  Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND REMOVAL 

Section 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he or she shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or councilmembers. Each such person shall continue to reside within the city during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file a written notice with the clerk of the city that he or she desires his or her name to be placed on the ballot as a candidate either for mayor or councilmember. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file the notice within the time provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Section 2.11. - Elections. 
(a)  At any election, all persons who are qualified under the Constitution and laws of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of the city shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(b)  All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  The mayor and councilmembers who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Cairo shall consist of five city council districts, designated Council Districts 1 through 5, as described in Appendix "A" of this Act and the accompany Redistricting Plan Components Report, which are attached hereto and made a part of the Charter of the City of Cairo, with five numbered posts. Each person seeking election shall be 21 years of age, be a qualified voter within the City of Cairo, and reside within the council district he or she represents. Each member shall be elected by a majority of the qualified electors voting within each district. Each member of the council shall, during his or her term of office, continue to meet such qualifications. 
(e)  The mayor of the City of Cairo shall be 21 years of age and be elected by the registered voters within the corporate limits of the city. 
(f)  The city councilmembers from Council Districts 1, 3, and 5 shall be elected at the general election for the city to be held during 2007 for terms of four years. The city councilmembers from Council Districts 2 and 4 and the mayor shall be elected at the general election for the city to be held during 2005 for terms of four years. Future successors shall be elected at the general election of the city immediately preceding the expiration of terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January following their election. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  (1)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 2.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Section 2.14. - Election by majority. 
The candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 2.15. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with Chapter 35 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 2.16. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who has any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or other city employment during the term for which he or she was elected. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person holding employment on the effective date of this Act. 
Section 2.17. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, a councilmember, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating Section 2.16 or any other express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of any officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Grady County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Grady County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Cairo. 
Section 2.18. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.19. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this Charter. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Section 3.10. - Organization. 
(a)  The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(b)  By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during any disability or absence of the mayor. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The city council shall by majority vote elect a presiding officer from its number for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor following call of the meeting to order by the clerk. Such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of the city council. 
Section 3.11. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 1, 4-25-16) 
Section 3.12. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 3.13. - Voting. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Section 3.14. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Cairo hereby ordains..." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 3.16 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Section 3.15. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 3.16. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting to which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance shall also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 3.17. - Codes. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 3.14 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 3.18 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 3.18. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Cairo, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the Code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 3.19. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his or her compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications. 
Section 3.20. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city council may remove the manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  If the manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)  The manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Section 3.21. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or his or her disability shall cease. 
Section 3.22. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He or she shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this Charter. He or she shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  He or she shall appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he or she appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Charter. He or she may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  He or she shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(3)  He or she shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but he or she may not vote; 
(4)  He or she shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by him or her or by officers subject to his or her direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  He or she shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  He or she shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  He or she shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his or her direction and supervision; 
(8)  He or she shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable; and 
(9)  He or she shall perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Section 3.23. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.17 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Section 3.24. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(5)  Appoint such committees and committee chairpersons of the city council as he or she shall deem reasonable and necessary. 
(6)  Vote if the issue before the council shall result in an equal number of voting members of council supporting and opposing the proposed issue. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 6, 4-25-16) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 4.10. - Department heads. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonselective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department or agency. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be appointed by the city manager. The city manager may suspend or remove directors under his or her supervision and the city manager shall give written notice of such action and the reason therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The city council shall review the suspension or removal at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. 
Section 4.11. - Boards. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Section 4.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall have actively practiced law for at least one year. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney. 
Section 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint with confirmation by the city council a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Section 4.14. - Treasurer. 
The city manager shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes to the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. 
Section 4.15. - City auditor. 
The city manager shall appoint with confirmation of city council a city auditor to perform the duties of an auditor/accountant. 
Section 4.16. - Position classification and pay plan. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Section 4.17. - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 5.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
Section 5.11. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by resolution of mayor and counsel. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take the following oath, given by the mayor or in his or her absence, the city clerk, "I will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of municipal court judge to the best of my ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. I will support and defend the Charter of the City of Cairo as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(Ord. No. 780, § 5, 4-25-16) 
Section 5.12. - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 5.13. - Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or 30 days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction being a fine in such amount as is permitted by state law or imprisonment for such time as is permitted by state law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 4, 4-25-16) 
Section 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Grady County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 5.15. - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, or providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 2, 4-25-16) 
Section 6.12. - Occupation taxes and business license fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling with the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 3, 4-25-16) 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Section 6.17. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.19. - Borrowing. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.23. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Section 6.24. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.25. - Adoption. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.27. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Section 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his or her recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 3.16 of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his or her recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by majority vote of the city council. 
Section 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by him or her to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 3.14 of this Charter. 
Section 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.32. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the city manager or mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 7.12. - Charter language on other general matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.13. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 7.14. - Specific repealer. 
An Act amending, consolidating, and superseding the several Acts incorporating the City of Cairo, in the County of Grady, State of Georgia, and creating a new Charter and municipal government for said municipal corporation, approved August 6, 1906 (Ga. L. 1906, p. 573), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Section 7.15. - [Submission.] 
The governing authority of the City of Cairo shall through its legal counsel cause this Act to be submitted for preclearance under the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended; and such submission shall be made to the United States Department of Justice or filed with the appropriate court no later than 45 days after the date on which this Act is approved by the Governor or otherwise becomes law without such approval. 
Section 7.16. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Section 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
  
APPENDIX A 
Council Districts 1 through 5 shall consist of the described territory of the City of Cairo attached to this Act and made a part thereof and further identified as "Plan Name: cairoccp2 Plan Type: Local User: staff Administrator: Cairo City Council." 
When used in such attachment, the terms "Tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a "BG" heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Cairo which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Cairo which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included with that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
Redistricting Plan Components Report 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Cairo, Georgia," and may be so cited; it may also be cited as "City Code", or "COCC". 
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-3. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the mayor and council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council: 
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Cairo in the County of Grady and State of Georgia. 
City clerk, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city clerk," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city clerk, chief of police of such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" or "COCC" is referred to without further qualification, it shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Cairo, Georgia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
County. The term "county" or "this county" shall mean Grady County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically provide otherwise. 
Gender. A word implying one gender shall extend and be applied to the other genders, where appropriate. 
In the city. The words "in the city" or "within the city" shall mean any territory, jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the city by law. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
May. The word "may" is permissive. 
Mayor and council, council, city council, governing body, governing authority. Whenever the term "mayor and council", "council," "city council," "governing body" or "governing authority," is used in this Code, it shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Occupant or tenant. The word "occupant" or "tenant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease or who actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" shall mean real, personal or mixed property. 
Public grounds. The words "public grounds" shall mean the parks and all public lands owned by the city, and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets, as defined in this section. 
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Where not otherwise provided in this Code, the same rules shall be applied in construing the provisions of this Code and ordinances of this city as are applied in construing the statutes of this state, which rules are found in O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1 through 1-3-3, and the same meanings are to be given words found in this Code and the ordinances as are given similar words found in the statutes of this state. 
Sec. 1-4. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not review any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the governing body without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing body during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(d)  All additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the governing body to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Cairo, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or in offense, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the punishment for violation of such provisions of this Code or any such ordinance shall be fixed by the municipal court by a fine in such amount as is permitted by state law or imprisonment for such time as is permitted by state law and subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each day any violation of this Code or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 588 § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 781, § 1, 4-25-16) 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court, § 9-3. 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances in cities, OCGA § 41-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments subject to general penalty. 
In case of the amendment by the mayor and council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-8 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Sec. 1-10. - Judgments and sentences to run consecutively. 
All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the municipal judge shall run consecutively unless otherwise specifically provided by said judge in such judgments and sentences. 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances continued in force. 
Nothing in this Code or in any ordinance adopting or amending this Code shall repeal or modify the following, except as may be otherwise provided: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance prescribing zoning or subdivision regulations, or zoning particular property, or approving any plat; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or other public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance amending the charter; 
(7)  Any civil defense or emergency management ordinance; 
(8)  Any appropriation or budget ordinance; 
(9)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective only for a stated or limited time; 
(10)  Any ordinance prescribing a classification and compensation plan for city personnel, or any retirement plan; 
(11)  Any ordinance not in conflict with this Code regulating traffic on specific streets or portions thereof or in specific areas of the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance levying any tax; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing any board or commission, not in conflict with this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance enacted after the date of the last ordinance included in this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance altering the city boundaries. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2001, provided for the adoption of an election district map (Reapportionment Plan 2/Revised) as prepared by the University of Georgia and the election districts as shown by that map be established as the election districts of the council members of the city. 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Meeting days of governing body. 
The governing body of the city shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Mondays of each month. 
Secs. 2-2—2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2001, provided for the adoption of an election district map (Reapportionment Plan 2/Revised) as prepared by the University of Georgia and the election districts as shown by that map be established as the election districts of the council members of the city. 

Sec. 2-20. - State law governs elections. 
Every municipal general election and the registration of voters in connection therewith and all other matters and things pertaining to such elections shall be carried on and conducted in accordance with the state municipal election code and any other pertinent laws of the state, and such other valid regulations as heretofore or as may be hereafter adopted by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 4, 7-31-72) 
Cross reference— Political activities on streets, § 15-10. 
State Law reference— Municipal election code, OCGA § 21-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-21. - Deputy registrars—Designated. 
The city clerk and all employees of the city clerk's office are hereby named and designated as deputy registrars of and for the city and of and for the board of registrars of the city. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 2, 9-23-68) 
Sec. 2-22. - Same—Power and authority. 
The city board of registrars and the deputy registrars shall have all power and authority as vested in them or required of them in the proper registration of voters in and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 3, 9-23-68) 
Sec. 2-23. - Superintendent of elections. 
The city clerk is hereby named, appointed and designated as the municipal superintendent of elections in and for the city. Such officer is hereby vested with all power granted to the municipal election superintendent of elections by the state municipal election code. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 1, 9-23-68) 
Sec. 2-24. - Legal advisor. 
The city attorney shall act as legal advisor to the board of registrars, to the deputy registrars and to the municipal superintendent of elections. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 5, 9-23-68) 
Sec. 2-25. - Challenge of electors. 
In the event any elector of the city should challenge the right of registration of any person whose name appears upon the electors list, such challenge shall be passed upon the board of registrars of the city, whose duty it shall be to assign such challenge for a hearing before the board at the council chambers on a day and hour certain, but at a time and date prior to the next general election of the city, and after such hearing the board shall immediately make its decision on said challenge and enter the same of record on the registration card of the challenged voter and shall thereafter give due notice, prior to the next election, to the challenged elector and to the city superintendent of elections. 
(Ord. No. 138, § 6, 9-23-68) 
Sec. 2-26. - Elections to be nonpartisan. 
No political party shall conduct a primary for the purpose of nominating candidates for a municipal election. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 1, 7-31-72) 
Sec. 2-27. - Council election districts. 
All municipal general elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia establishing same. The various council election districts shall be reviewed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3 following receipt of information from each decennial census conducted by the United States. Each district shall be formed of contiguous territory and the boundary lines of each district shall be the center lines of streets or other well defined boundaries. Further, each district shall take into account the variations of populations among the districts so as to comply with "one person, one vote" requirements of the United States Constitution. Further, reapportionment shall be limited to adjusting the boundary lines of existing districts only to the extent reasonably necessary to comply with the requirements of federal and state law. 
(1)  City council election district No. 1. Begin at the point of intersection of the north right-of-way of the Calvary-Reno Road (which right-of-way is the city corporation limit) and the city corporation limit exiting said right-of-way and run thence north along the city corporation limits to the centerline of 11th Avenue N.W.; thence northeast and east along the centerline of 11th Avenue N.W. to the centerline of U.S. Highway 84; thence southwest along the centerline of U.S. Highway 84 to the centerline of North Broad Street; thence south along the centerline of North Broad Street and South Broad Street to the centerline of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W.; thence west along the centerline of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W. to the centerline of 7th Street S.W.; thence south along the centerline of 7th Street S.W. to the centerline of 2nd Avenue S.W.; thence west along the centerline of 2nd Avenue S.W. to the centerline of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W.; thence southwest along the centerline of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W. to the centerline of 13th Street S.W.; thence south along the centerline of 13th Street S.W. to the south right-of-way of the Calvary-Reno Road; thence southwest along the south right-of-way of the Calvary-Reno Road that becomes the city corporation limits; thence follow the city corporation limits southwest, west, northeast, southeast and northeast to the point of beginning. 
(2)  City council election district No. 2. Begin at the point of intersection of the centerline of South Broad Street and the centerline of the Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W. and run thence south along the centerline of South Broad Street to the city corporation limits; thence west and northwest along the city corporation limits to the south right-of-way of the Calvary-Reno Road; thence northeast along the south right-of-way of the Calvary-Reno Road to the centerline of 13th Street S.W.; thence north along the centerline of 13th Street S.W. to the centerline of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W.; thence northeast along the centerline of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W. to the centerline of 2nd Avenue S.W.; thence east along the centerline of 2nd Avenue S.W. to the centerline of 7th Street S.W.; thence north along the centerline of 7th Street S.W. to the centerline of Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue, S.W.; thence east along the centerline of Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W. to the point of beginning. 
(3)  City council election district No. 3. Begin at the point of intersection of the centerline of South Broad Street and the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way and run thence east along the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way to the city corporation limits; thence follow the city corporation limits as follows: south to Joyner limits; thence follow the city corporation limits as follows: south to Joyner Road, west to 20th S.E., west, southwest and south to Joyner Road, west to Georgia Highway 93 South, thence leaving Georgia Highway 93 South, south, west, northwest to Forest Glen Road, west along Forest Glen Road, north, west, southwest and south to the south right-of-way of Forest Glen Road; thence west along the south right-of-way of Forest Glen Road to the centerline of South Broad Street; thence north along the centerline of South Broad Street to the point of beginning. 
(4)  City council election district No. 4. Begin at the point of intersection of the centerline of 5th Street N.E. and the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way and run thence north along the centerline of 5th Street N.E. to the centerline of 11th Avenue N.E.; thence east along the centerline of 11th Avenue N.E. to the centerline of Bondvilla Drive N.E.; thence southeast and east along the centerline of Bondvilla Drive N.E. to the centerline of 11th Street N.E.; thence north along the centerline of 11[th] Street N.E. to the centerline of 12th Avenue N.E.; thence east along the centerline of 12th Avenue N.E. to the city corporation limits; thence generally east, south, east and west along the city corporation limits to the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way; thence west along the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning. 
(5)  City council election district No. 5. Begin at the point of intersection of the CSX Railroad right-of-way and the centerline of 5th Street N.E. and run thence north along the centerline of 5th Street N.E. to the centerline of 11th Avenue N.E.; thence east along the centerline of 11th Avenue N.E. to the centerline of Bondvilla Drive N.E.; thence southeast and east along the centerline of Bondvilla Drive N.E. to the centerline of 11th Street N.E.; thence north along the centerline of 11th Street N.E. to the centerline of 12th Avenue N.E.; thence east along the centerline of 12th Avenue N.E. to the city corporation limits; thence follow the city corporation limits in a general northwest, west, south, west, south, west, south and east to the centerline of 11th Avenue N.W.; thence east along the centerline of 11th Avenue N.W. to the centerline of U.S. Highway 84; thence southeast along the centerline of U.S. Highway 84 to the centerline of North Broad Street; thence south along the centerline of North Broad Street to the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way; thence east along the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 586 § 1, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 732, § 1(Exh. A), 8-8-11) 
Sec. 2-28. - Run-off election. 
In any municipal general election where there are as many as three (3) candidates for any particular office and where none of said candidates receives a majority of the votes cast for the candidates for such office, there shall be a run-off election as between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-407(c) and the candidate receiving the most votes at such run-off election shall be declared duly elected for said office by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 5, 7-31-72) 
Sec. 2-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Defacing city hall, § 15-4; entering city-owned parks, recreational areas after closing hours, § 24-1. 

Sec. 2-30. - Use of tobacco. 
Within all enclosed areas within all city-owned buildings and city motor vehicles, the use of tobacco, both smoking and nonsmoking, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 424, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 2-31. - Hunting and/or fishing. 
Hunting and fishing upon all property owned by the city shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 438, 11-14-94) 
Secs. 2-32—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECORDS RETENTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 637, adopted March 13, 2006, amended the Code by enacting new provisions which have been designated as §§ 2-61—2-68 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-61. - Title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "City of Cairo Records Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 637, § 1, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 2-62. - Administration. 
The city manager, or his designated representative, shall be responsible for the administration of the records management program. The city manager shall designate an employee to serve as records management officer for the City of Cairo. The records management officer will act for and in behalf of the city in directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 2, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 2-63. - Records committee. 
(a)  Created; composition; general duties. There is hereby created a records committee, said committee to consist of the judge of municipal court, the clerk to the mayor and council, the city manager, and the designated records management officer, or their designated representatives. It shall be the duty of the records committee to review and recommend approval, disapproval or modification of records retention schedules to the mayor and council. Review of records retention schedules shall be based upon legal, fiscal, administrative and historical retention requirements. 
(b)  Chairman; meetings; quorum. The records management officer shall serve as chairman of the records committee and shall schedule meetings of the committee as required. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. 
(c)  Schedules adopted by reference; authority of committee. The Records Retention Schedules for Local Governments, as complied by the Georgia Department of Archives and History and approved by the State Records Committee on March 7, 1983, and revised on May 2005, are hereby adopted and by reference incorporated herein and made a part of this Code as completely and to the same extent as if all provisions thereof were fully recited in this article. Provided, however, that the records committee herein established and created may make recommendations to revise, amend, delete or add schedules not in conflict with state law and deemed advisable and necessary. Final approval authority for all recommendations by the records committee shall be the responsibility of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 3, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 2-64. - Archival depository. 
The mayor and council shall designate an archival depository to store those records determined to have permanent historical value. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 4, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 2-65. - Centralized records center. 
The mayor and council shall select and establish a centralized records storage center. All records not required for day-to-day office operation in the various departments and offices of the city shall be transferred to the records center for storage until destroyed in accordance with the approved records retention schedule. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 5, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 2-66. - Equipment; alteration, destruction of records. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall provide for adequate equipment and supplies for the proper storage of records. Such equipment may include microfilm or microfiche or other equipment as permitted or required by state law. 
(b)  No record shall be altered or destroyed except in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 6, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 2-67. - Records to be open. 
(a)  Access to the city archival depository and records storage center shall be permitted during normal and reasonable hours. Except as otherwise provided by law, ordinance or policy adopted by the mayor and council, all records shall be open to the public or the state or any agency thereof. 
(b)  In all cases where an interested member of the public has a right to inspect or take extracts or make copies from public records, instruments or documents, any such person shall have the right to access to the same while in the possession, custody and control of the records management officer, or his authorized deputy. Such work shall be done under the supervision of the records management officer, who shall have the right to adopt and enforce reasonable rules governing the work. All inspections, extracts or copies shall be done in the room where the records, documents or instruments are kept by law. 
(c)  The records management officer may make copies of any records or any preservation duplicates transferred or deposited in the archival depository or records center or may make reproductions of such records. The records management officer may establish and charge reasonable fees for such services. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 7, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 2-68. - Records retention schedules. 
Records retention schedules previously approved by the state records committee, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-93, are hereby ratified and adopted by the mayor and council as if they had originally been approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 8, 3-13-06) 
Secs. 2-69—2-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-80. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-81. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-82. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Cairo. 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-83. - Findings. 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, garbage collection, and natural gas services. 
(3)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(4)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(5)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-84. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(1)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, a valid state driver's license with photo or another acceptable identification, and social security card. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and hard copy of the information is retained in a locked file cabinet. 
(2)  Each account shall be assigned an account number, which shall be unique to that account. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-85. - Access to covered account information. 
(1)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(2)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the by the director of information technology on a regular basis, shall be at least eight (8) characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(3)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(4)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-86. - Credit card payments. 
(1)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four (4) digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-87. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(2)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(3)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
c.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
d.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(4)  [Additional provisions.] Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-88. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(1)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the mayor, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the mayor in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
a.  Contact the customer; 
b.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(2)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the mayor, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the mayor in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by city manager: 
a.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
b.  Deny the application for the new account; 
c.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
d.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-89. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-90. - Program administration. 
The city finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The finance director will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Sec. 2-91. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more covered accounts, the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Chapter 3 - AIRPORTS AND AIRCRAFT 

Sec. 3-1. - Use of airport by pedestrians and drivers of ground vehicles. 
(a)  The municipal airport and all of its area, including access roads thereto, are hereby declared to be special city property for special use only. 
(b)  No person, without a special written permit from the city manager, shall use the access roads or any part of the airport of any of the area thereof at any time, except to use the airport for the purpose for which it was established, as follows: 
(1)  To meet an aircraft which is scheduled to land. 
(2)  To enter upon an aircraft which is about to depart. 
(3)  To be present and see off another person who is about to depart on an aircraft. 
(c)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to the owner or operator of an aircraft located or stationed at the airport, not to one who, at the request of such owner or operator enters the airport area for the purpose of repairing or servicing an aircraft when located or stationed at the airport. 
(d)  No person shall enter upon or travel over the access roads to the airport, or enter upon or use any part of the airport or the area thereof, at night, without a special written permit from the city manager, unless it be the owner or operator of an aircraft at that time located on the airport, or some person who, at the request of the owner or operator of an aircraft, enters the airport area for the purpose of repairing or servicing an aircraft then located or stationed in the airport area. 
(e)  No person shall enter with an automobile or other ground motor vehicle upon or travel down, across or over, the paved or hard-surfaced runway of the airport, or of any unpaved extension thereof; at any time or for any purpose. 
(f)  No person shall operate a ground motor vehicle on and along the access road running from the public road known as the Airport Road into the airport area of the municipal airport at anytime in the daytime at a rate of speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The sheriff of this county or any deputy, nor to any member of the police force of the city. 
(2)  The city manager, the mayor, or to any member of the council, nor to any other person accompanying any of them; provided, the exception set out in this subsection shall not constitute an exemption to subsection (e). 
(3)  A watchman, guard or attendant employed by the city of or for the airport, whether on duty temporarily or permanently. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.5-17—2.5-21) 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire, etc., fields by municipalities, OCGA § 6-3-20. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 299, adopted May 5, 1986, deleted Ch. 4 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 4 in lieu thereof, as herein set forth. Said former Ch. 4, Arts. I—III, pertained to alcoholic beverages in general, beer, and wine, and was derived from the following: Code 1965, §§ 3-4, 3-5, 3-12—3-14(1), (3), (4), 3-16.1, 3-17—3-19, 3-19.2, 3-20, 3-22, 3-24, 3-25, 3-27—3-29, 3-33—3-37, 3-44—3-47, 3-52, 3-53, 3-59, 3-60, 3-62, 3-63; Ord. No. 144, §§ 1—3, adopted 4-19-69; Ord. No. 199, § 1, adopted 9-10-73; Ord. No. 204, §§ 1—6, adopted 3-25-74; Ord. No. 226, adopted 7-12-76; and Ord. No. 258, adopted 12-13-82. 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses for beer and wine, § 14-13. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, OCGA § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority of city to license and regulate, § 3-4-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter defined words shall have the meanings specified unless the context in which the word or term is used clearly requires that a different meaning be used. 
(1)  Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
(3)  Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) per cent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
(4)  Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) per cent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
(5)  Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six (6) per cent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
(6)  Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) per cent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(7)  Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Cairo. 
(8)  Manufacturer means any maker, producer, distiller, brewer, vintner, rectifier, blender, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. 
(9)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
(10)  Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
(11)  Wholesaler means any person who sells distilled spirits to other wholesale dealers or retail dealers. 
(12)  Legal age, as used in this chapter, is identical with the legal age provided in the acts of the legislature of the State of Georgia relative to alcoholic beverages and as the same may from time to time be amended. 
(13)  Brown-bagging. 
(a)  Brown-bagging shall mean the bringing, taking or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into any business licensed to operate within the City of Cairo, provided that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other unit designated for private residential occupancy or that shall be operated by a not for profit organization shall not fall within this definition. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, brown-bagging includes but is not limited to: 
1.  Any person who brown-bags; 
2.  Any person who participates in the consumption of an alcoholic beverage being brown-bagged; 
3.  Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises holding a business license except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown-bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy or the operation of a facility by a not-for-profit group; 
4.  Any employee of the business establishment in whose presence brown-bagging knowingly or within reckless indifference occurs. 
(c)  Every person whether acting as an individual owner, employee of an owner or operator for an owner or whether acting as an agent or independent contractor for the owner, employer or operating, who participates, allows, directly or indirectly, brown-bagging in violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 622, § 1, 1-27-05) 
Sec. 4-2. - Purposes of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purpose of promoting the health and general welfare of the city; to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; to protect and preserve schools, and churches; to give effect to existing land use; to preserve residential areas with reasonable consideration being given to the character of the area and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in roads, and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; and to protect against the evils of concentration of package liquor store licenses in one family, and/or corporation, and to prevent an undesirable person from engaging in or having an interest in alcoholic beverages or the sale thereof in the city; to enhance the economic development of the city and to provide a medium that will encourage the development of the hospitality industry. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-3. - Compliance with chapter required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, as defined in section 4-1, which shall include beer, wine and distilled spirits, within the city without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter, but the properly licensed sale of same is hereby declared lawful. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-4. - Licenses—Required; consideration and approval, subsequent issuance; conditional approval. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured or warehoused except under license granted by the mayor and council as provided herein, but the properly licensed sale of same is hereby declared lawful. 
(b)  Each application provided for in this chapter shall be considered and passed upon by the mayor and council in regular or special session, legally assembled. Upon approval of the application and payment of the required license fee, the applicant shall be entitled to the issuance of the license; provided, however, the mayor and council reserve the right to approve such issuance of the license or licenses conditioned upon full and final compliance by the licensee with all applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-5. - Same—Original application disqualification criteria. 
When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no original application shall be considered and no license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be issued by the mayor and council to or for: 
(1)  Any person, as determined by the mayor and council by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, moral character, mental capacity, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Any person who shall have been convicted or who shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere, or forfeited a bond, to any felony within a period of ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of any such application, or to any misdemeanor within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of any such application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state, or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance except a traffic violation, particularly, but not limited to, those involving force or violence, prostitution, alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations. The term "convicted" or "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding this provision, the mayor and council, in their sole discretion and by a unanimous vote, may direct the issuance of a license to persons who have in the past been convicted of, or plead guilty to, or entered a plea of nolo contendere, or forfeited a bond on any crime, and the mayor and council after a thorough investigation of all the facts, including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant have determined that such action is in keeping with the public good and ends of justice, or the public interest and welfare. 
(3)  A location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the mayor or council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(4)  Any person who is an elected official (or that person's spouse, parent or child of) or employee (or that person's spouse, parent or child of) of the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-6. - Same—Applications; license not to issue under certain conditions. 
(a)  All applications for licenses shall be made on forms furnished the applicant by the city clerk and shall indicate, along with all reasonable information necessary to complete the form, which of the following is to be considered for licensing of the applicant to conduct: 
(1)  Retail package beer; 
(2)  Retail beer—Consumption on the premises; 
(3)  Retail package wine; 
(4)  Retail wine—Consumption on the premises; 
(5)  Package liquor; 
(6)  Liquor pouring. 
(b)  Upon approval by the mayor and council of an original or renewal application for license of one (1) or more of the above type sales of alcoholic beverages, such sales of alcoholic beverages may be made by the applicant after a license is issued for all or the remaining part of the license year in which the license is issued unless the license is revoked or suspended for "due cause" as provided in section 4-8. The month of February of the year following the last year licensed is hereby allowed for filing of an application for renewal for a new license year. If application for renewal is not received and approved and payment of license fees received before April 1 of such renewal year, all sales of such alcoholic beverages shall cease as of the last legal hour in March for such sales. 
(c)  Wholesale sales of alcoholic beverages in Cairo by wholesalers licensed by the State of Georgia are hereby declared legal, subject to the right of the city to charge a wholesaler for any violation of state law or regulation, and to request a hearing thereon before the state revenue commissioner. 
(d)  No person, or his or her spouse, parent or child, who has a direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any license or have an interest in any other license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
(e)  The city clerk of the City of Cairo shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent or any other monies owing to the City of Cairo. No license shall be issued nor shall a license be renewed until all such debts are paid in full. 
(f)  All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the police department and the report of investigation presented to the mayor and council for consideration with the application. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 681, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 4-7. - Same—Fees. 
The following annual fees shall be paid the city before any license to sell alcoholic beverages is issued: 
(1)  Retail package beer ..... $150.00 
(2)  Retail beer—Consumption on the premises (may also sell, occasionally, packaged beer, with no beer to be consumed on the premises outside of the building) ..... 250.00 
(3)  Retail package wine ..... 350.00 
(4)  Retail wine—Consumption on the premises (may also sell, occasionally, packaged wine, with no wine to be consumed on the premises outside of the building) ..... 350.00 
(5)  Retail package liquor ..... 4,000.00 
(6)  Liquor pouring ..... 1,200.00 
(7)  Beer wholesalers (licensed by the State of Georgia), (when applicable, same shall be prorated or refunded pro rata, on a monthly basis) ..... 150.00 
(8)  Wine wholesalers ..... 200.00 
(9)  Wine and beer wholesale combination ..... 300.00 
(10)  Upon filing an original application or reapplication (except renewals) with the city clerk of the City of Cairo, the applicant shall deposit in cash or by check a processing fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) for beer and/or wine only; or one hundred dollars ($100.00) for liquor package or liquor pouring; or one hundred dollars ($100.00) total for all licenses applied for, to cover the expense of investigation and processing the application, which fee shall not be refundable and shall not apply against the fee of any license granted hereunder. There shall be no investigation fee charged wholesalers licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(11)  On all renewals filed and fee paid on or after April 1, 1987, and thereafter on or after April first of the license renewal year, there shall be paid a ten (10) per cent delinquent penalty. 
(12)  There will be no proration of license fees when licenses are obtained during the license year; except that licenses for retail package liquor and liquor pouring obtained during the license year will require the full license fee if more than six (6) months remain of the license year, and fifty (50) per cent of the license fee if less than six (6) months remain of the license year. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 395, §§ 1, 2, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 681, § 2, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 4-8. - Same—Suspension, revocation, denial of renewal or transfer. 
(a)  Notice, hearing. Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be denied, suspended or revoked or transfer refused, by the mayor and council for due cause. Before the mayor and council shall deny any application for a license or for the transfer of any license, or shall revoke or suspend any existing license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing from the city clerk to show cause before the mayor and council at a time and place specified therein not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice, why the application for, or renewal of, a license or for transfer of license should not be denied, or why the license should not be revoked or suspended, as the case may be, stating the grounds therefor, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why the application should not be denied or the license revoked or suspended, after which the mayor and council shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. The hearing herein provided for need not be at a regular meeting of the mayor and council but may be at such time, and place as shall be fixed in the notice. All decisions denying, suspending or revoking any license or application shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant. In addition, at any hearing as provided herein, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence, have an attorney, and have testimony recorded at his expense. 
(b)  Due cause generally. 
(1)  "Due cause" for the suspension, revocation or denial of the renewal or transfer of any license shall consist of an act or omission found to be by the mayor and council, after a hearing as above provided, a violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any city ordinances, other than traffic violations or ordinances, or failure of the licensee or his employee to promptly report to the police department any violation of the law or ordinance, breach of peace, disturbance or altercation, resulting in violence occurring inside the premises. 
(2)  "Due cause" may also be found should the licensed establishment have become a "trouble spot" in the judgment of the mayor and council by reason of disturbances or acts of disorderly conduct or violence having occurred in the establishment or on the premises thereof; provided that when the license of any establishment has been revoked or renewal of license denied because said establishment has become a "trouble spot," no further license shall be issued under this chapter to any person, firm or corporation at said location for a period of at least twelve (12) months from the date of revocation. 
(3)  "Due cause" shall also consist of the business or the operation or location thereof, or the owner or any person connected therewith, ceasing to meet any of the qualifications for the issuance of license as stated in this chapter. 
(4)  "Due cause" may also be found upon the revelation of any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application hereunder. Any material omission from or untrue or misleading information which is contained in an original, renewal or transfer application for license hereunder shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. 
(5)  Failure to control operation resulting in "public nuisance." If the failure to control the operation either inside the building or outside on the property results in controlled substance abuse, prostitution, gambling, flagrant indecent conduct or obscenity, fighting, excessive noise, loitering or illegal parking, to the number of times and extent that the mayor and council, after proper hearing, should find the establishment to have become a public nuisance, then such failure may be declared to be "due cause" for suspension or revocation of the alcoholic beverage license for such establishment, or the denial of renewal application for same. 
(c)  Emergency due cause—Failure or refusal to cooperate with the city police acting in line of duty. On evidence of failure or refusal of the licensee or employee hereunder to cooperate with any police officer on any reasonable request or action within such officer's duties, responsibilities or powers, including all police powers, rights and duties to investigate to determine any pertinent fact relating to the establishment, the licensee, any employees or corporate officers or partners, the chief of police shall immediately order all sales of any alcoholic beverages suspended until after a hearing as set out in the "due cause" hearing provided for in subsection (a) above, such hearing to be concerning such failure or refusal to cooperate. 
(d)  No refund of license fee. When a license is so revoked or suspended, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee. 
(e)  Effect of revocation by state. Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell any alcoholic beverage at retail, the city license to deal in such product shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and council or any municipal officer. If the state has suspended the license or placed the same on probation, then the city license is automatically suspended or probated, as the case may be. 
(f)  Emergency situation. The mayor is the delegated authority to suspend any license hereunder in any emergency situation, and said suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the mayor and council. In addition, in any emergency situation, the chief of police is hereby authorized to cause the business in question to close temporarily until he decides the emergency or possible riotous situation to be at an end, or until such decision is made by the mayor and council at its next regular meeting, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-9. - Same—Transfers, changes of ownership, locations. 
(a)  Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest therein, with the approval of the mayor and council and subject to the terms of this section, the license may be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or to the heir(s) at law of the deceased person, if such administrator, executor, personal representative or heir(s) meet all of the other qualifications contained herein. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of his estate and disposition of the license or his interest therein, but in no event to exceed six (6) months. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license from withdrawing from the partnership and assigning his interest in such partnership to one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this section are fully complied with, and then only upon the approval of the mayor and council. 
(d)  Any change in the ownership interests contained on the application shall cause the immediate cessation of sales of any alcoholic beverages and no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made until any such change or changes in the ownership interests are approved by the mayor and council, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply in a situation where one or more individuals who have ownership interests in the license cease to a have such ownership interest, but the remaining ownership interest remains unchanged except as to the division of the remaining interests. 
(e)  Should a transfer of the location be desired, the location shall meet all requirements of a new license to be issued hereunder, except payment of the license fee. The investigation fee will accompany the application and the unearned portion of the license fee may be transferred to the new location in the event the transfer of location is approved by the mayor and council. 
(f)  An application for a new license on an existing licensed location shall meet all requirements of a new license to be issued hereunder except payment of license fee shall be waived only in the case of a purchaser of a business where an existing license remains valid. The investigation fee will accompany the application and the unearned portion of the license fee may be transferred to the new license in the event the transfer or issuance of a new license on an existing licensed location is approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-10. - Zoning provisions. 
(a)  No license to engage in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink at retail shall be granted except in area zoned neighborhood commercial district (C-1), highway commercial district (C-2), central business district (CBD), commercial planned unit development (C-PUD), light industrial district (I-1), and heavy industrial district (I-2). 
(b)  No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages except where the wholesaler business is to be located in an area of the city which is zoned neighborhood commercial district (C-1), highway commercial district (C-2), central business district (CBD), commercial planned unit development (C-PUD), light industrial district (I-1), and heavy industrial district (I-2). 
(c)  No license to engage in the sale of packaged distilled spirits at retail shall be granted except in an area zoned neighborhood commercial district (C-1), highway commercial district (C-2), central business district (CBD), commercial planned unit development (C-PUD), light industrial district (I-1) and heavy industrial district (I-2). 
(d)  Beer or wine may be licensed in any commercial establishment or private club not in violation of any zoning ordinance of the city. 
(e)  Existing private clubs which have qualified and become licensed under the provisions of this chapter are hereby exempt from the zoning requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 551, § 1, 3-26-01) 
Sec. 4-11. - Prohibited conduct upon licensed premises. 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcohol beverages: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this section or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 2, 4-28-97) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 487, § 2, adopted Apr. 28, 1997, did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion of provisions which pertained to conduct within licensed alcoholic beverages premises as § 4-11 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 4-12. - Brown-bagging violation. 
Brown-bagging as defined herein is prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo. Upon conviction, such persons shall be punished pursuant to the provisions of section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 2, 1-27-05) 
Secs. 4-13—4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-26. - Hours—Daily, Sundays, holidays. 
(a)  Daily and Sunday hours. 
(1)  Packaged beer or wine locations: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed to sell packaged beer or wine hereunder to permit the sale or engage in the sale of such beer or wine except from 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. For security purposes, if any work is needed to be done during legally closed hours, the police department must be notified at least one (1) hour in advance. 
b.  Hotels, motels, grocery stores, service stations and restaurants shall not be required to close unrelated functions and activities not licensed under this chapter or customarily operated at hours other than the foregoing specified hours, but all alcoholic beverages of any nature must be and remain in the custody and control of the licensee or his employees, and may not be dispensed in any manner, and the licensee is hereby required to evict any other person possessing any of the above. 
(2)  Beer or wine on-the-premises consumption: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed to sell beer or wine to permit the sale or engage in the sale of such beer or wine except from 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. All customers will clear the premises no later than 1:00 a.m. on Sundays, and all owners and employees shall vacate the premises before 2:00 a.m. on weekdays and before 2:00 a.m. on Sundays. For security purposes, if any work is needed to be done during legally closed hours, the police department must be notified at least one (1) hour in advance. 
b.  Hotels, motels, grocery stores, service stations and restaurants shall not be required to close unrelated functions and activities not licensed under this chapter or customarily operated at hours other than the foregoing specified hours, but all alcoholic beverages of any nature must be and remain in the custody and control of the licensee or his employees, and may not be dispensed in any manner, and the licensee is hereby required to evict any other person possessing any of the above. For the purpose of this paragraph, "restaurant" shall be defined by the definition of that word contained in subparagraph (a)(13) of section 4-38 of this Code. 
(3)  Liquor pouring: 
a.  On-the-premises consumption. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell alcoholic beverages except during the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight Monday through Thursday and Saturday. All customers will clear the premises no later than 1:00 a.m. on weekdays and Sunday and all owners and employees shall vacate the premises before 2:00 a.m. on weekdays and Sunday except as set forth herein. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell alcoholic beverages except during the hours of 5:00 a.m. on Friday to 1:00 a.m. on Saturday. All customers will clear the premises no later than 2:00 a.m. on Saturday and all owners and employees shall vacate the premises before 3:00 a.m. on Saturday. For security purposes, if any work is needed to be done during legally closed hours, the police department must be notified at least one hour in advance. 
b.  Hotels, motels and restaurants shall not be required to close unrelated functions and activities not licensed under this chapter or customarily operated at hours other than the foregoing specified hours, but all alcoholic beverages of any nature must be and remain in the custody and control of the licensee or his employees, and may not be dispensed in any manner, and the licensee is hereby required to evict any other person possessing any of the above. 
(4)  Package liquor stores: Licensees shall not engage in the sale of any commodity except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(5)  Wholesalers: The business hours of any wholesaler licensed hereunder shall be from sunrise to sunset, exclusive of Sunday. 
(b)  Holidays. 
(1)  Packaged liquor: Except as hereinafter provided, no licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package at retail shall permit his place of business to be open on Sunday. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell any alcoholic beverage at a package beer or wine location, beer or wine for on premises consumption, or liquor under a pouring license during Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 302, §§ 1, 2, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 310, § 1, 3-9-87; Ord. No. 323, §§ 1, 2, 2-8-88; Ord. No. 572, § 1, 2-25-02) 
Sec. 4-27. - Persons under legal age; exception. 
(a)  Furnishing. It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 4-3 of the City Code for any person holding an alcoholic beverage license, or any other person, or his or her agent or employee, to sell or give away, or permit the sale or gift of any alcoholic beverage to any person under legal age, except for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician [duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, or in the home with parental] consent. No person shall be convicted under this section if such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person who is being furnished alcoholic beverages is of legal age or over. For purposes of this section, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, with the person's photograph, and giving the person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or Georgia identification card. The licensee shall cause all persons who appear to be near the legal age to exhibit, and the licensee or his employee shall inspect, one of the means of identification allowed above. 
(b)  Consumption, possession. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 4-3, of the City Code for any person under legal age to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage except for medical purposes pursuant to the prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, or in the home with parental consent. 
(c)  Attempting to purchase or possess alcoholic beverage. It shall be unlawful for any person under legal age to attempt to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(d)  Use of fake, etc., credentials. It shall be unlawful for any person under legal age to exhibit fake, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages to which he or she is not entitled. 
(e)  Underage persons on licensed premises. No person who holds an alcoholic beverage license allowing on-the-premises consumption, or his agent or employee, shall allow any person who has not attained legal age to be in, frequent, or loiter about the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or unless such person is an employee of the license holder; provided, however, that such person shall be permitted in restaurants or other places serving food without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person in the military service who has reached the age of eighteen (18) years and who has on his or her person a valid military identification card. 
(f)  Employment of persons—Legal age. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any person of legal age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling, taking orders or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment. 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured. 
(3)  Taking orders for, and having possession of, alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(4)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under legal age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off-the-premises. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 302, § 3, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 306, § 1, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 328, § 1, 5-23-88) 
Secs. 4-28—4-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 303, § 1, adopted July 16, 1986, deleted § 4-36 in its entirety. Said section pertained to on-premises beer and wine consumption and seating capacity of drinking establishments, and was derived from Ord. No. 299, adopted May 5, 1986. 
Sec. 4-37. - Distilled spirits, packaged liquor. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Adequate parking shall mean one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area within the store building of the applicant, but not less than a minimum of six (6) spaces. Such off-street parking shall have vehicular access to streets and be constructed of allweather surface; all off-street parking must be on the premises and located adjacent to the sides or front of the building. Such parking shall be designed to allow for separate and coordinate lanes of ingress and egress, and if a drive-in window is made available to the public, it must be situated so that there may be space for as many as three (3) cars waiting in turn for service at such window. On the entire business premises relating to all businesses located thereon as allowed in subsection (j), the parking spaces shall not be less than the total required under this section, together with other parking ordinance requirements of the city for all of said businesses. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages shall mean distilled spirits as defined in section 4-1(3). 
(3)  Business area shall mean any area which is correspondingly zoned in accordance with the City of Cairo zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Family shall mean and include any person related to the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this section within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to the law of this state. 
(5)  Fortified wines are classed as liquor and shall mean any wines or beverages made by fermentation, to which there have been added distilled spirits and where the alcoholic content is more than twenty-one (21) per cent alcohol by volume. 
(6)  License shall mean the authorization by the governing authority of the City of Cairo to engage in the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages on the premises for a calendar year, or the remaining portion of a calendar year. 
(7)  Licensee shall mean a person or persons, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this section. 
(8)  Manufacturer shall mean a producer or bottler of beer or wine. 
(9)  Package store shall mean a geographic location within the City of Cairo wherein a license may be issued for the sale of packaged liquors. Such package store must be operated as a distinct business and cannot be operated in conjunction with or as a part of any other business, except as provided in this section. 
(10)  Person shall mean an individual or individuals, a partnership or partnerships, a corporation or corporations and an association or associations. 
(11)  Premises shall mean that area circumscribed by the property lines of the property upon which a licensee is authorized to operate a package liquor store. 
(12)  Private residence shall mean a house, dwelling or building wherein not less than one family customarily resides. This shall not apply to any of the above which has been unoccupied for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application hereunder. 
(13)  Retail sale shall mean selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
(14)  Visibility shall mean a full and unobstructed view of the inside service area through at least sixty (60) per cent of one exterior wall fronting on a traveled street, or forty (40) per cent of each of two (2) exterior walls, at least one of which fronts on a traveled street. The percentages herein are to be calculated on the surface area from floor to ceiling of any of the chosen walls and doorways circumscribing the customer service and display area. The required visibility required hereunder may not be blocked by any signs nor by vending machines, displays or other obstructions. Visibility shall include inside illumination at all times of the day and night of at least ten (10) footcandles in any part of the customer service and display area. 
(15)  Wholesaler shall mean any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale, any alcoholic beverages as defined herein. 
(b)  Citizenship, residence requirement. 
(1)  No license for the retail sale of packaged liquor by the package shall be granted to any applicant who has not resided continuously within the State of Georgia for a period of twelve (12) months next preceding the date on which the application is made, except that the wholesalers or distillers are exempt from this residency provision. Where the applicant is a corporation, which may be a newly formed corporation, all officers and stockholders in such corporation, and all officers and stockholders in any corporation which holds stock in the applicant corporation, or any further extension of corporate interest must meet the requirements contained in this paragraph. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements contained in this paragraph must be met by all partners, whether general or limited. All licensees that sell packaged liquor must remain a resident of the State of Georgia during the tenure of their license. 
(2)  All applicants including partners and stockholders having an interest in an applying corporation, or in any corporation having an interest in the applicant corporation, shall furnish all data, information and records pertinent to the application requested of them by the police department of the city, which shall include fingerprints, except in the case of any corporate stockholders when an officer of the corporation making the application shall be fingerprinted, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. All applicants shall submit an executed version, for city purposes only as modified by the city clerk, of the personnel statement Form ATT-17, State of Georgia Department of Revenue, Alcohol Tax and Control Unit. The applicants, by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any person or persons requested by the police department of the city and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such application and/or license issued under the terms of this section. The failure to produce such person or persons within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of any application pending under this section. 
(c)  Advertisement of application for license to engage in business; signs posted. 
(1)  All applicants for original licenses hereunder shall give notice of the making of an application by advertisement at least once a week, for three (3) consecutive weeks prior to the date of hearing on such application, in the weekly newspaper published in the city in which the legal advertisements of the city are published, which notice shall contain the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the name of all of the partners, whether limited or general, and if a corporation, the names of the officers and all stockholders therein and the names of all officers and stockholders of any corporation owning an interest in the applicant corporation, and the date and time the mayor and council will hear such application. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a two-inch, two-column advertisement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for an original license to advertise the notice of hearing as required as follows: 
"Notice of application for retail license to sell packaged liquors. 
The undersigned has made application to the Mayor and Council of the City of Cairo for a retail license to sell packaged liquors at ____________ . This application will be heard by the Mayor and Council at its meeting to be held at ____________ o'clock p.m. on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 

(2)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business for a week before the date of hearing, a sign or signs stating the following: 
"PACKAGE LIQUOR LICENSE APPLIED FOR. HEARING BEFORE THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL FOR THE CITY OF CAIRO, GEORGIA, ON THE ____________ DAY OF ____________ , 19 ____________ ." 
(3)  The sign or signs required by subsection (2) shall be not less that twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and shall face toward all public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property adjoining the proposed location. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen from all public properties adjoining the proposed location. 
(d)  Limitation on number of licenses within a family and/or corporation. 
(1)  No person and/or member of his family and/or corporation shall own, hold or control any interest whatsoever in more than one license in the City of Cairo to engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages by the package at retail. 
(2)  As used in this paragraph, an interest in the license shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the outright owner of the license, a co-owner of a license, a general or limited partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license, a stockholder in any corporation which owns all or any part of a license, an owner or leasing any real estate which is occupied by a retail liquor store, or shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in a retail liquor store. 
(3)  All applications for license made on forms provided by the city clerk, whether original or for renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interests, as hereinbefore defined in subsection (2), in retail liquor stores. This shall include the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling packaged liquor at retail, together with any interest each person or members of his family has in any other retail liquor store; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for said land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; the name and address (by affidavit from owner, lessor or sublessor of such land and building) of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or any other interest in and to the land and building on and in which said retail liquor store is to be located; a copy of the proposed lease, and any other information requested by the police department or the mayor and council pertinent to the application under investigation. 
(e)  Conducting a public hearing on original application. 
(1)  No original application for a license hereunder shall be acted upon or issued by the mayor and council until after advertisement and public hearing thereon, as required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  A public hearing upon all original and completed applications for a license hereunder shall be called by the mayor and council for a regular meeting not more than sixty (60) days after the filing of the application. 
(3)  Each applicant for an original license shall submit a plot plan and floor plan prepared by an architect, engineer, contractor, surveyor or other qualified person showing all compliance with all requirements contained in this section. 
(f)  Minimum requirements; floor space of retail outlet, parking required, adequate refuse storage required, visibility from exterior. 
(1)  Any structure housing a licensed retail package store, or proposed therefor, under the terms of this section, shall contain not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space, including customer service and display area, storage area and service areas. 
(2)  Adequate parking shall be provided as defined elsewhere in this section. Adequate refuse storage space shall be provided with access for servicing by refuse collection vehicles. 
(3)  The store so occupied for retail sales shall be constructed so that three (3) entire outside walls can be seen from the exterior, and visibility, as defined elsewhere in this section, must be provided from the exterior into the customer service and display area. Visibility, as required, may not be blocked by any signs, vending machines, displays or other obstructions. 
(g)  Completion of proposed licensed premises. Where a building in which a retailer proposes to operate under the provisions of this section is, at the time of application for such license, not in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be approved for such location provided the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the city clerk of Cairo and show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this section and applicable ordinances of the city. No license shall then be issued and no sales shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with all other provisions of this section and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(h)  Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection. When any license or permit to operate a retail package store under this section is rejected by the mayor and council, the city clerk shall not accept, and the mayor and council shall not consider, any application from the applicant for a license within twelve (12) months from the time of such rejection by the mayor and council. 
(i)  Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishments; forfeiture for nonuse. Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of six (6) consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in said license, shall, upon expiration of such six-month period, automatically forfeit such license, which license shall by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any further action of the mayor and council and no refund of license fee shall be made to the license holder; provided, however, that a license holder may apply to the mayor and council to cease business operations for a period not to exceed an additional six (6) months for such reasons as building renovation, illness, or other such reasons as the mayor and council in its discretion may approve. 
(j)  Restrictions on adjoining businesses. 
(1)  A licensee of a retail establishment under this section shall not operate such business in the same store together with any other business, except licensed packaged beer and wine, which may be in a connected adjoining store selling packaged beer and wine if such packaged beer and wine store sells only beer, wine and other items of convenience normally associated with the retail sale of packaged beer and wine, and then only if such packaged beer and wine is sold for carry-out purposes, and provided further, that there shall be a cash register in both such authorized adjoining operations. No such retailer shall sell, offer for sale, display or keep in stock in his place of business where packaged alcoholic beverages are offered for sale, any other commodity or product, except: 
a.  Packaged wine (if licensed); 
b.  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits, but no beverages of any kind may be opened or consumed in said place of business; and 
c.  Packaged beer (if licensed); 
d.  Packaged ice; 
e.  Tobacco products; and 
f.  Sealed packages of empty cups. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this paragraph, any legal business may adjoin or abut either or both a package liquor store and package beer and wine store, provided all building requirements in this section are met; and provided further that there shall be no doorways whatsoever located between any adjoining businesses other than between businesses neither of which is licensed to sell beer, wine, or distilled spirits, except a door is authorized between adjoining package liquor and package beer and wine stores which may be unlocked only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. 
(k)  Exterior signs. Each business occupying a building under the terms and provisions of this section shall be entitled to erect signs (see section 22-391 et seq.) that comply with all ordinances regarding signs currently within effect in the City of Cairo and comply with requirements of state law applying to exterior signs. All signs shall be unilluminated and use letters not larger than eight (8) inches in height flat against the outside of building, below the roofline, bearing the words "liquor", "beer", "wine", "champagne", or any combination thereof, and "package store" or "liquor store", together with the trade name of the retail dealer. In addition to such signs flat against the outside of the building, the retail dealer may display at a location on the tract of property upon which the business is located, but not affixed to the building, one unilluminated sign using letters not larger than eight (8) inches in height bearing the words "package store" or "liquor store" and the trade name of the retail dealer. A sign not affixed to the building may be no larger than sixteen (16) square feet in area. The trade name or style of the retailer as listed on the application form submitted to the city clerk, and approved by the mayor and council, in compliance with this section must be the same name used on the sign. 
(l)  Coin-operated devices, similar machines on premises. It shall be unlawful for a retail dealer in spirituous liquors by the package to permit any gambling on the premises by use of coin-operated devices and it shall be unlawful for any person to play or operate for the purpose of gambling, pinball machines, machines for amusement purposes, coin-operated machines for dispensing tobacco products or packaged ice and the violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 9-3 of the City Code. 
(m)  Consumption prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the sale of packaged liquor and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. If such licensee shall also have a license to sell beer or wine, it shall likewise be unlawful for any of such items to be consumed on the premises where alcoholic beverage sale is licensed. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 302, § 4, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 303, § 2, 7-16-86; Ord. No. 573, § 1, 3-11-02; Ord. No. 681, § 3, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 775, § 1, 7-27-15; Ord. No. 787, § 1, 9-26-16) 
Sec. 4-38. - Liquor pouring. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages shall mean distilled spirits as defined in section 4-1(2) or the mixing of beverages with same. 
(2)  Fortified wines shall mean any wines or other beverages made by fermentation; to which there have been added distilled spirits, and where the alcoholic content is more than twenty-one (21) per cent alcohol by volume, are classed as liquor. 
(3)  License shall mean the authorization by the mayor and council of the City of Cairo to engage in the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages by the drink on the premises. 
(4)  Licensee shall mean a person or persons, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this section. 
(5)  Lounge shall mean a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to the herein licensed premises of a restaurant and/or its adjacent lobby or reception area, with all booths, stools and tables being open to view only from within the lounge. All lounges shall have a seating capacity for at least twenty (20) persons. All access and all exits to and from the lounge shall open into the restaurant and/or lobby or reception area adjoining the restaurant except that emergency exits or doors solely for service or delivery personnel are authorized. 
(6)  Manufacture shall mean a producer or bottler of beer, wine or distilled spirits. 
(7)  Person shall mean an individual or individuals, a partnership or partnerships, a corporation or corporations and association or associations. 
(8)  Premises shall mean the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building, wherein distilled spirits are sold. 
(9)  Licensed premises with reference to a fifty (50) guest room hotel or motel, shall mean the boundary lines of the property on which the same is located, including specifically guest rooms and open areas serviced as enclosed areas. 
(10)  Fifty (50) room hotel or motel shall mean that business establishment containing a minimum of fifty (50) guest rooms for transient occupancy and constructed to normal size and condition for the hotel or motel industry. 
(11)  Private club shall mean an organization existing under the law of the State of Georgia or a charter from a state or national parent organization, and having a tax-exempt status under Section 501 of the U.S. IRS Code, having at least fifty (50) members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofitable purposes, owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members or guests; provided, that no member or officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid or directly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
(12)  Private residence shall mean a house, dwelling or building wherein not less than one family customarily resides. This shall not apply to any of the above which has been unoccupied for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application hereunder. 
(13)  Restaurant shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served from 11:00 a.m., until 9:00 p.m. 
(14)  Retail sale shall mean selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public by pouring for on-the-premises consumption. 
(15)  School shall mean only such state, county, city or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(16)  Wholesaler shall mean any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale any alcoholic beverages as defined herein. 
(b)  Information, data, records, processing of application. 
(1)  All applicants shall furnish all reasonable data, information and records requested of them by the police department and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The individual owner applying, or one partner, or one corporate officer shall be fingerprinted for city purposes, except that in the case any of the above has current prints of file as a privilege licensee of the city, this requirement may be waived. Notwithstanding this provision, however, city officials may require fingerprints from other partners or corporate officers, and new set of prints from the above referred to privilege licensees. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person or persons requested by the police department and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce such person or persons within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(2)  The city may require sixty (60) days for processing any application for license required under this section. 
(c)  Advertisement by an original applicant of intent to engage in business; signs posted. 
(1)  All applicants for original licenses hereunder shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement at least once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing, in the weekly paper published in the city in which legal advertisements of the city are carried, which notice shall contain the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and the date and time the mayor and council would hear the application. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a two-inch, two-column advertisement. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for an original license to advertise the notice of hearing as required as follows: 
"Notice of application for retail license for liquor pouring (mixed drinks). 
The undersigned has made application to the Mayor and Council of the City of Cairo for a retail license for liquor pouring (mixed drinks) at ____________ . This application will be heard by the Mayor and Council at its meeting to be held at ____________ o'clock p.m. on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 

(2)  The applicant shall cause to be placed on the location of the proposed business for a week before the hearing a sign stating the following: 
"LIQUOR POURING LICENSE APPLIED FOR, HEARING BEFORE THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CAIRO, GEORGIA, ON THE ____________ DAY OF ____________ , 19 ____________ ." 
The sign or signs shall be not less than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and shall face towards all public property which adjoins the location. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen from all public properties adjoining the location. 
(d)  Investigation of application; report. All applications required by this section shall be investigated by the police department and acted upon by the mayor and council after investigation has been completed by the police department and their report presented to the mayor and council. 
(e)  General requirements of business licensed hereunder. No application for any license hereunder shall be granted unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Licenses shall be granted only to private clubs or restaurants which may include lounges operated in conjunction with such restaurants. 
(2)  All restaurants applying for or having pouring licenses must, in addition to all other requirements relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, meet and maintain the following requirements: 
a.  Meet all health and sanitation requirements set forth for food service establishments by the city, state and federal government. 
b.  Must have installed and operative cooking facilities and kitchen equipment for accommodating the demands of sixty (60) food customers. 
c.  Must have a complete place setting of metal cutlery and nondisposable dishes in regular use for each of sixty (60) food customers. 
d.  Must have seating, at booths or tables designed for food service, sufficient for at least sixty (60) persons, and such booths or tables shall be large enough to accommodate at least two (2) place settings of metal cutlery and nondisposable dishes. 
e.  Such a restaurant as contemplated by this section shall be, at all times during the hours hereinafter set forth, prepared to serve full-course meals with a substantial variety of culinary choices, or substantial substitutes therefor, and shall print and maintain a complete menu of same and furnish such printed menu to each food customer, with prices which are competitive with other restaurants within the city, whether or not those restaurants engage in the business of pouring mixed drinks. 
f.  All foods listed on the required printed menu, or substantial substitutes therefor, must be available from 11:00 a.m., until 9:00 p.m., or if all sales of mixed drinks are stopped before 9:00 p.m., then from 11:00 a.m., until such earlier time as all mixed drink sales have ceased, at least five (5) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating. The hours for service of food may be prolonged, but in no event shall mixed drinks be sold at any hour contrary to this chapter. 
(3)  The gross square footage of the dining area, lounge area, serving area, kitchen, restrooms and storage rooms of any restaurant business other than private clubs, licensed hereunder must be a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet. Parking requirements for restaurants licensed hereunder shall be the same as those required in the present ordinances of the city, except that existing restaurants and nonconforming structures will be exempt from such requirements. 
(f)  Special qualifications for private clubs. Private clubs, as defined herein, shall furnish with license applications, a copy of the articles of incorporation from the State of Georgia, if incorporated by the state, and documentation of the valid up-to-date status of its national or state charter from its parent organization, together with documentation of its compliance denoting a tax-exempt status under Section 501 of the U.S. IRS Code. Private clubs whose primary purpose is not categorized by the term or terms "lodge," "fraternal order," or "veterans post," such as private clubs for golf, tennis and other similar recreation are exempt from the above provision which relates to a national or state charter from a parent organization. 
(g)  Completion of proposed licensed premises. Where a building in which a retailer intends to operate under the provisions of this section is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this section. No sales or consumption will be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and is in conformity with all other provisions of this section and the City Code. 
(h)  Plot plan and floor plan to accompany application for new license. 
(1)  Each applicant for an original license, except private clubs, shall submit a plot plan and floor plan prepared by an architect, engineer, contractor, surveyor or other qualified person, showing all compliance with all distance, square foot, kitchen arrangement and food serving area table and seating arrangement requirements contained herein. 
(2)  On renewals, the same as the preceding shall be accomplished unless the applicant states in the reapplication that there has been no change in any of the above compliance items. 
(i)  Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage by the drink beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(j)  Exterior advertisements and media advertising prohibited. 
(1)  No signs of any kind, painted or electric, advertising any brand or price of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the exterior, or in the window of any licensed premises. No placard or sign or any kind which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the price of liquors sold therein. 
(2)  No outside signs of the any kind shall indicate that liquor by the drink is served within the licensed premises except that restaurants may add to the name of the business the words "and Lounge" onto any legal signs or advertising. 
(k)  Coin-operated devices; provisions. Coin-operated equipment is permitted on the premises for the following purposes: vending machines, such as cigarettes; vending a service, such as music or television; and for amusement, excluding any equipment designed or used for gambling purposes or refunds given in such manner as tickets, money or prizes to entice play. 
(l)  Package, broken package, carry-out sales prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell, or give or lend to any person, for any purpose, including carry-out, any alcoholic beverages by the package or bottle or by the broken container, or remainder, in a package or bottle. 
(m)  Service in back rooms prohibited. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms, and provided further that this prohibition shall not apply to private clubs hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-39. - Fingerprinting of beer, wine and liquor license applicants and certain employees; fees. 
(a)  Each applicant for a license to sell beer, wine, or liquor in the City of Cairo, who has not heretofore been licensed by the City of Cairo to sell beer, wine, or liquor at retail, shall be required to submit to a complete fingerprinting record and test, pursuant to the rules and regulations established by the city from time to time, the same being used by the city to supplement the information contained on the application and to make available to the city any records of criminal offenses, either federal or state, from other jurisdictions. 
(b)  The city manager, within his own discretion, from time to time, may require employees working in an establishment selling beer or wine to submit information for purposes of supplementing any information available to the city with respect to employees. Each such employee shall pay a ten-dollar ($10.00) fee for local records check and I.D. card to be worn while so employed. The city manager may require them to apply for complete fingerprinting for criminal history check within all provisions hereinafter as apply to employees of package liquor stores or liquor pouring establishments, and in the discretion of the city manager such additional fees as are reasonably related to recovery of the city's cost in time, equipment and material for such additional fingerprint search shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 681, § 4, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 4-40. - Fingerprinting of certain persons affiliated with package liquor stores or liquor pouring establishments; procedure and eligibility provisions. 
(a)  Applicability; clearance. No person may work, except as in (b) below, in an establishment holding a license for sale of packaged liquor or for liquor pouring hereunder until such person has been fingerprinted by the police department and has been issued an I.D. card temporarily by the police department which shall indicate the person is eligible temporarily. 
(b)  Time limit. All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall, within three (3) days after the date of their first work in an establishment holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages, report to the city police department for purposes of being fingerprinted. 
(c)  Investigation and report. The city police department shall have a reasonable search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted. In the event there is no record of a violation of this chapter, such temporary issuance above shall become permanent unless cancelled. If it should be found there is a violation of this chapter by the person fingerprinted, the chief of police shall notify the licensee that such person is not eligible for continued work. No person shall continue working after receiving such notice of ineligibility. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee after receiving notification of the ineligibility of such worker to ensure that the worker ceases to work. 
(d)  Wearing of I.D. cards by all employees. The police department will furnish an identification card with picture for every worker of each licensed establishment, and every worker will publicly wear said identification card inside the business establishment at all times. The city manager may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for working. 
(e)  List of employees to be filed. It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the chief of police the names of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees, with the names of new employees, must be filed with the chief of police within three (3) days from the date of any such changes. 
(f)  Licensee responsible. The licensee is responsible for the conduct or actions of his employees while in his employ. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-41. - Use of persons with prior convictions; prohibited. 
No licensee shall work in any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity found to have been convicted of, or who shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere to, any felony within a period of ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of any such application, or to any misdemeanor within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of any such application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state, or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance except a traffic violation. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. 
Notwithstanding the above provisions, the mayor and council, in its sole discretion, may direct the issuance of a letter of eligibility to persons who have in the past been convicted of, or plead guilty to, or entered a plea of nolo contendere, or forfeited a bond on any crime not involving force or violence, and the mayor and council after a thorough investigation of all the facts, including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant have determined that such action is in keeping with the public good and ends of justice, or the public interest and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-42. - Distance provisions relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages; allowable proximities to schools, churches, and residences. 
(a)  Special distance from residential property provisions. 
(1)  Package liquor, liquor pouring or beer and wine consumption on premises. No license hereunder shall be granted to any proposed location which is within fifty (50) feet of any private residence. The distance for the purpose of this section shall be measured in all directions from the nearest wall enclosing the proposed store where alcoholic beverages are to be sold to the nearest point of any residential property line, except that the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply on residences located adjacent to or in areas of the city zoned C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District, C-2 Highway Commercial District, CBD Central Business District, or C-PUD Commercial Planned Unit Development District. 
(2)  Private clubs. Distance requirements of subparagraph (a)(1) are not applicable for private clubs that were in operation prior to January 1, 1985, operating as a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia as defined herein. 
(b)  General distance provisions. 
(1)  All beer and/or wine sales and liquor pouring sales; exceptions. No beer or wine or liquor pouring mixed drinks may be sold at any location within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, school grounds, college campus, or alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by any branch of government. The school building or educational building referred to herein shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state are taught. No liquor pouring mixed drinks may be sold at any location within one hundred (100) yards of any church building. No beer or wine or liquor pouring mixed drinks may be sold at any location for consumption on the premises within one hundred (100) yards of any housing authority property. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(2)  Packaged liquor sales. No packaged liquor may be sold at any location within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by any branch of government, or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building or educational building. The school buildings or educational buildings referred to herein shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to private school buildings and to private school buildings in which subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state are taught. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. No packaged liquor may be sold at any location for consumption on the premises within one hundred (100) yards of any housing authority property. 
a.  As used in the previous two (2) subsections, the term "housing authority property" means any property containing three hundred (300) housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Title 8, the "Housing Authorities Law." 
(3)  Exceptions to subparagraphs (b)(1) and (2) for the licensing of certain hotels or motels and certain private clubs. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the licensing of the sale of alcoholic beverages by: 
a.  Hotels or motels of fifty (50) guest rooms or more. 
b.  Bona fide private clubs licensed under the provisions for licensing liquor pouring in such clubs. 
(4)  Distance measurement methods. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all measurements to determine distances for the requirements of subparagraphs (b)(1) and (2) shall be measured by the most direct unimpeded route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
a.  From the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
b.  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
c.  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
d.  To the front door of the building, or the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable to the language of subparagraphs (b)(1) and (2). 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 303, § 3, 7-16-86; Ord. No. 306, § 2, 8-11-86; Ord. No. 681, § 5, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 4-43. - Consumption-on-premises establishments. 
(a)  Off-street parking. The requirements of off-street parking for this section 4-43 shall be the same as would be required under the ordinances or codes for a new building, or under the zoning ordinances or codes for a new business. 
(b)  Visibility; shrubbery. On any premises occupied by a license holder hereunder, the immediate proximity of the building shall be maintained so as to keep vegetation low and vision unobstructed. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of consumption-on-premises licenses, or denial or renewal of such licenses. 
(c)  Prohibited consumption on-premises. No licenses hereunder shall permit consumption of alcoholic beverages except inside portions of the building legal for such consumption. 
(d)  Premises to be well-lighted. The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall have sufficient lighting so that all entrances and parking areas are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. Also, the lounge and restaurant areas, if any, and all tables, booths and other areas where customers are served, and all passageways for customers shall be sufficiently well-illuminated so that they may be viewed by those in such areas. 
(e)  Fire and safety; maximum occupancy provisions. All drinking establishments licensed or to be considered for licensing for consumption on the premises of any alcoholic beverages shall be measured as to the net usable floor area, and publicly visible posters stating the maximum number of persons allowable inside the building where such beverages are consumed shall be posted by the fire chief or assistant fire chief. The maximum allowable floor space per occupancy in the net usable floor area shall be fifteen (15) square feet. The alcoholic beverage licensee will be responsible for seeing that the established occupancy limits are not exceeded, and the violation of this provision shall be due cause for suspension or revocation by the mayor and council after proper hearing, of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Secs. 4-44—4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX 
DIVISION 1. - MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 4-61. - Levied on wholesale dealers. 
(a)  Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, there is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the City of Cairo, Georgia, a specific excise tax computed on the basis of .4166 cents ($0.004166) per ounce or metric equivalent of malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo. 
(b)  All malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container and commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in paragraph (a) of this section, but in lieu thereof there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo an excise tax of six dollars ($6.00) for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons or metric equivalent sold by such wholesale dealer within the City of Cairo and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-62. - Monthly reports; payments. 
Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the City of Cairo shall file a report with the city clerk by the fifteenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, sold by him within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the City of Cairo not later than the fifteenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with section 4-61. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-63. - Additional to other taxes or license fees. 
The excise tax provided for hereinabove shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages at wholesale within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-64. - Penalty and accrued interest on late reports and delinquent payments; city clerk to issue execution. 
The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten (10) per cent of the total amount due, plus interest accrued at the rate of twelve (12) per cent per annum. The clerk of the City of Cairo shall issue an execution against the said wholesale dealer, firm, or corporation so delinquent on his or its property, for the amount of the excise tax due and delinquent, plus penalty and interest accrued, and shall proceed to collect same in the same manner as is done in the case of executions issued for collection of city ad valorem property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-65. - False reports or nonpayment declared grounds for revocation of licenses of wholesale dealers of malt beverages. 
At any time it is found that false and fraudulent reports have been made by the wholesale dealer, his agents, officers, or employees, and upon which payment of malt beverages excise tax was reported or paid to the city, and at any time the monthly report and payment called for in section 4-62 is past due over thirty (30) days, the wholesale licensee shall be given not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days notice of hearing before the mayor and council to show cause why his license to sell malt beverages in the City of Cairo should not be suspended or revoked because of such false and fraudulent reports, or nonpayment of taxes past due more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-66. - Sale of malt beverages upon which tax was not paid prohibited; penalties. 
It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city, any malt beverage on which the tax as above set out has not been paid to the wholesaler for the city as above provided. In addition to the penalties provided for in section 9-3 of this Code, the violation of this article shall be deemed a sufficient ground for the revocation of the license of any retail or wholesale dealer holding a license or permit to sell malt beverages within the city. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
DIVISION 2. - WINE AND SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS 

Sec. 4-67. - Levied on retail dealers. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon all retail dealers selling wine or spirituous liquors within the City of Cairo, Georgia, a specific excise tax computed on the basis of eighty-three cents ($0.83) per gallon or metric equivalent of wine or spirituous liquors sold by each retail dealer within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-68. - Collection, custody of taxes. 
At any time of delivery of wine or spirituous liquors to any retail dealer, the wholesaler shall collect from the retail dealer the excise taxes imposed in section 4-67 and hold the same in trust for the city until said tax is remitted to the city as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-69. - Additional to other taxes or license fees. 
The excise tax provided for hereinabove shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling at retail wine or spirituous liquors within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-70. - Invoices; required kept as records by wholesaler and retailer. 
Upon each and every delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in duplicate shall be prepared showing the number and size of each container of wine and spirituous liquors delivered, together with the price therefor and the excise taxes due and collected thereon. The original of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with such delivery, and the second copy of such invoice shall be retained by the wholesaler. Each retailer or wholesaler shall keep said invoices or copies for a period of twelve (12) months after the date of delivery, and during such twelve-month period, such invoices shall be made available for inspection by a representative of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-71. - Monthly reports; payments. 
Each wholesale dealer selling wines or spirituous liquors within the City of Cairo shall file a report with the city clerk by the fifteenth day of each month which shall correctly show the name of each retail dealer to whom a delivery was made during the preceding calendar month, the quantities of wine and spirituous liquors delivered to each dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of section 4-68, and such other reasonable information as may be required by the city. Said report shall be accompanied by remittance made payable to the City of Cairo for all taxes collected or due, as shown on said report. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-72. - Penalty and accrued interest on late reports and delinquent payments; city clerk to issue execution. 
The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten (10) per cent of the total amount due, plus interest accrued at the rate of twelve (12) per cent per annum. The clerk of the City of Cairo shall issue an execution against the said wholesale dealer, firm, or corporation so delinquent on his or its property, for the amount of the excise tax due and delinquent, plus penalty and interest accrued, and shall proceed to collect same in the same manner as is done in the case of executions issued for collection of city ad valorem property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-73. - Noncompliance herewith, false reports, or nonpayment declared grounds for revocation of licenses of wholesale dealers of wine and spirituous liquors. 
At any time it is found that a wholesale dealer has not complied with the terms imposed in this article, or that a wholesale dealer has made a false and fraudulent report to the city upon which excise taxes were reported or paid to the city, or at any time the monthly report and payment called for in section 4-71 is past due over thirty (30) days, the wholesale licensee shall be given not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days notice of a hearing before the mayor and council to show cause why his license to sell wine or spirituous liquors in the City of Cairo should not be suspended or revoked because of such noncompliance, or false and fraudulent reports, or nonpayment of taxes past due more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Sec. 4-74. - Sale of wine or spirituous liquors upon which tax was not paid prohibited; penalties. 
It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within this city, any wine or spirituous liquors on which the tax as above set out has not been paid to the wholesaler for the city as above provided. In addition to the penalties provided for in section 9-3 of this Code, the violation of this article shall be deemed a sufficient ground for the revocation of the license of any retail or wholesale dealer holding a license or permit to sell wine or spirituous liquors within the city. 
(Ord. No. 299, 5-5-86) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, OCGA § 4-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Bird sanctuary—Area designated. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1965, § 4-11) 
Sec. 5-2. - Same—Shooting, molesting, etc. 
No person shall trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl, or rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. 
(Code 1965, § 4-12) 
Sec. 5-3. - Same—Abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  If starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality as to constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, in the opinion of the city health authorities, such health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Garden Club, after having given at least three (3) days actual notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of the club. 
(b)  If, as a result of such meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate the nuisance, the birds may be destroyed, in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities, under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1965, § 4-13) 
Sec. 5-4. - Livestock. 
Livestock shall only be kept or confined in areas of the city zoned for agricultural use (AG). Livestock including horses, mules, ponies, goats, donkeys, cows, sheep, hogs or other livestock within the city shall be located at least two hundred fifty (250) feet, strict measure, from any residence, other than that of the people owning the livestock, or business house, such measurement to be made from the nearest livestock enclosure wall to the nearest corner of the wall of the residence or business house. 
(Code 1965, §§ 4-31, 4-41, 4-52; Ord. No. 680, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 5-5. - Area requirements, fencing. 
Every enclosure for confining horses, mules, ponies, goats, donkeys, sheep, cows, hogs or other livestock shall be made secure by a fence of sufficient height to contain the animals and shall consist not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and shall contain no less than two thousand (2,000) square feet for each mule, horse, pony, goat, donkey, sheep, cow, hog or other livestock. Electric fences shall not be used. 
(Code 1965, §§ 4-32, 4-42, 4-53; Ord. No. 680, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 5-6. - Same—Sanitary condition. 
All enclosures for confining horses, mules, ponies, goats, donkeys, cows, hogs or other livestock, shall be maintained at all times in a clean and sanitary condition, subject to approval by the appropriate authorities of the city and county. 
(Code 1965, §§ 4-34, 4-44, 4-55; Ord. No. 680, § 1, 4-28-08) 
State Law reference— Rabies control, OCGA § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-7. - Same—Removing animals when conditions become unsanitary. 
The officials of the city or county may order removal of all horses, mules, ponies, goats, donkeys, cows, hogs and other livestock, from any enclosure that becomes unsanitary upon ten (10) hours written notice to the owner or person in control thereof. 
(Code 1965, §§ 4-35, 4-45, 4-56; Ord. No. 680, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 5-8. - Livestock at large. 
No person shall leave any horse, mule or other livestock unhitched or unconfined so as to permit the running at large thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 4-51; Ord. No. 680, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 726, §§ 2, 3, 4-11-11) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 726, adopted April 11, 2011, repealed former § 5-8 which pertained to fencing of domestic fowl, and derived from Ord. No. 136, adopted Aug. 5, 1968, and Ord. No. 680, adopted April 28, 2008. Section 3 of said ordinance renumbered former § 5-9 as § 5-8. 
State Law reference— Livestock at large, OCGA § 4-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-9. - Domestic fowl. 
Subject to the restrictions set forth herein related to domestic animals, the mayor and council establishes the following regulations regarding domestic fowl. Domestic fowl shall not be subject to the maximum number of animals set forth within section 5-26 entitled "Keeping of animals." 
The following domestic fowl are permitted within the City of Cairo: Chickens, ducks or geese. Roosters and pea fowl are excluded. Any residential lot shall be permitted to have no more than twenty-four (24) domestic fowl. Domestic fowl shall be confined by a substantial fence or pen. The perimeter or location of the fence or pen shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from the property lines of all other residential lots or parcels occupied by adjacent property owners or their tenants or other persons in possession of the adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 4, 4-11-11) 
Secs. 5-10, 5-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 278, adopted Aug. 13, 1984 provided for the repeal of §§ 4-19 and 4-20 of the 1965 Code, from which §§ 5-11 and 5-12 were derived. Said former sections pertained to bitches in heat running at large and the number of dogs permitted to be kept within the city. For current provisions relative to similar subject matter, see Art. II of this chapter. 
Secs. 5-12—5-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 402, § 1, adopted June 10, 1991, amended Art. II in its entirety by deleting former Art. II, §§ 5-24—5-33, and adding a new Art. II, §§ 5-24—5-39, to read as herein set forth. Prior to amendment, Art. II, §§ 5-24—5-33, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 359, § 1, adopted May 8, 1989. 

Sec. 5-24. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively attributed to them in this section. 
Abandoned animal. A domesticated animal which has been placed or found upon private or public property or roadways without the permission of the owner, tenant, or custodian of the property thereof, and left unattended and uncared for upon such property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned if it is retained upon the property of the owner or custodian without food and water for a period exceeding thirty-six (36) hours. 
Animal control officer. Any person designated by the mayor and council to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Animal control shelter. The facility designated by the mayor and council and/or any governmental unit with whom the city may have a contract for the detention or impoundment of animals. 
City is the City of Cairo, a municipality and the entire area embraced in the corporate limits of the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
Domesticated animal. An animal that is accustomed to live in and about the habitation of the population, including but not limited to fowl, cats, dogs, cows, horses, swine, sheep, and goats. 
Guard dog. A dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon command or any dog, while not so trained, which reasonably is expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon which he or she is located. 
Humane manner. Care of a domestic animal to include, but not be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation and sanitary shelter, or manner of restraint, wholesome food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed. 
Owner. Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing, harboring or having the care or custody whether temporarily or permanently of a domesticated animal for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or more. 
Restraint. An animal is "under restraint" within the meaning of this article if it is (1) controlled by a leash, (2) at "heel" or accompanying a competent person and obedient to that person's commands (under verbal control of owner or other person), (3) on or within a vehicle driven or parked on the streets, and (4) within the property limits of its owner. 
Untagged animal. An animal is considered to be untagged if a valid license tag is not attached to a collar which is kept on the animal. 
Vicious animals. Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domesticated or wild animals by virtue of attacking or biting a person or other animal without provocation shall be deemed a vicious animal. This definition shall not be deemed to include any activity which is permitted under the game laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 653, § 1, 2-14-07) 
Sec. 5-25. - Agreement with other governmental unit. 
The mayor and council may enter into a contractual agreement with any governmental unit of Grady County to provide animal control services with the city. No such contract may be entered into until such governmental unit may have available those facilities that may be required under this article and such unit have in effect any animal control ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-26. - Keeping of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit an animal under his ownership, possession, control or care to be a nuisance as defined herein or under restraint as set forth within this article within the city. An animal shall be deemed to be a nuisance for the following reasons: 
(1)  Lack of proof of current rabies vaccination. 
(2)  Biting of person or animal. 
(3)  Upon request by law enforcement agency or health department following investigation and determination that an animal is a nuisance or vicious as defined herein. 
Except for a person in an occupation requiring or involving the keeping of animals located within areas permitted by City of Cairo zoning regulations, no person shall be allowed to keep more than four (4) animals at any location. Puppies and kittens less than ten (10) weeks shall be excluded. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-27. - Vicious animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization or department to possess or maintain within the city any animal that is vicious unless such animal is confined and secured upon the property of the owner or other person having custody of such animal in such a manner as would prohibit such animal from molesting, attacking or biting any person or other animal. Such animal shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the injury of young children, and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have a minimum dimension of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two (2) feet. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his or her premises facing out from all sides of the premises warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property. This sign should be visible and capable of being read from a public highway or thoroughfare within twenty (20) feet of its placement. 
A vicious animal may be off the owner's premises only if it is muzzled and restrained by an approved lead or chain not exceeding three (3) feet in length and is under the control of an adult who is an able-bodied person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but must prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 653, § 2, 2-14-07) 
Sec. 5-28. - Guard dogs. 
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or custodian of any residential property on which a guard dog or security dog is kept for security purposes to post a notice in a prominent and conspicuous location on such property. Such notice shall comprise the words "WARNING—GUARD DOG" and shall be in clearly distinguishable block letters upon a background of clearly contrasting color. Such letters shall not be less than one (1) inch in width and not less than five (5) inches in height. Further, the owner, tenant or custodian shall post the universal symbol for guard/dangerous dog in a prominent and conspicuous location on such property. If a guard dog is confined within a fenced area, such notice shall be conspicuously posted upon such fence at every entrance and exit of the fence. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-29. - Identification and inoculation. 
Identification. Any person owning a vicious animal shall on or before April 1, 2007 and annually thereafter on or before April 1 of each year register that animal and provide a current color photograph of that animal with the office of clerk of the city and pay a registration fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00). At the time of registration, each owner of any dangerous animal within the limits of the City of Cairo shall provide to the clerk proof of liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any acts of property damage or liability incurred by virtue of injury inflicted by such animal. Such insurance shall name the city as a coinsured solely for the purpose of notice of cancellation of the policy. Upon payment of the fee, the city clerk shall issue a current dangerous dog collar of an approved color for the purpose of identification and which color is to be worn by the dog at all times as proof of registration. If when due to the length of the dog's hair, the color is not visible, an approved colored lead or chain shall be used. 
Inoculation. Every owner custodian of an animal that is four (4) months of age or older within the city shall have such animal vaccinated for rabies, if required by law. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any animal that does not have a current rabies inoculation and such animal shall at all times wear a securely attached collar about its neck or harness that shall have attached thereto a current rabies tag. 
[Violation.] Any person failing to identify or inoculate the animal shall be guilty of violation of this section and be subject to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 653, § 4, 2-14-07) 
Sec. 5-30. - Impoundment of animals. 
Any animal that shall be a public nuisance or is not under restraint as defined herein or otherwise in violation of this article, whether or not the animal is on private or public property, shall be impounded by the designated animal control officers in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-31. - Redemption of impounded animal. 
It shall be the duty of the designated animal control officers to notify the owner, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, of every animal impounded, by telephone or by mail. If no owner can be ascertained, the animal will be held for three (3) days before being destroyed unless other arrangements have been made. Following notification, the animal will be held for three (3) days. Thereafter, the animal may be destroyed or placed for adoption. Before release, the owner must provide proof of current rabies vaccination or pay for rabies vaccination before release. No animal will be released without proper rabies protection or necessary arrangements made for rabies inoculation. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-32. - Fees. 
The fees to be paid before an animal is retrieved by owner shall be established by resolution of mayor and council. The following fees are established upon the adoption of this section: 

 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 653, § 3, 2-14-07) 
Sec. 5-33. - Adoption. 
The designated animal control officers are authorized to offer for adoption any animal that has been impounded and unclaimed by the owner or has been delivered to the division. 
Any animal that is eligible for adoption may be offered after three (3) days from the date of impoundment if the owner should be unknown or within three (3) days of notice to the owner if the owner shall be known. The party desiring the animal shall pay the impoundment fee and one (1) day boarding fee as an adoption fee and the cost of rabies inoculation if the animal is not displaying a current rabies inoculation tag. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-34. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
The designated animal control officers shall be authorized to dispose of any animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible, or to donate any animal to a public or nonprofit institution or agency, if such animal has remained unclaimed within the prescribed period of time or has not been adopted within three (3) days after impoundment or notice to the owner, or it has been injured and is suffering or in great pain and such animal does not display an identification tag or no determination of owner can be made from a reasonable investigation. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-35. - Disposition. 
The disposal of any animal as provided in this section does not relieve the owner of any liability for any violation of this article. If the owner of any animal is known or ascertainable but for any valid reason cannot be reached within the prescribed three-day period, the designated animal control officers shall be authorized to hold the animal until such time as the owner can be reached. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-36. - Abuse of animals. 
The animal control service shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect, as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The owner or possessor of the animal shall be charged according to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-37. - Dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  The Dangerous Dog Control Law, as same shall be in effect within the State of Georgia, is incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
(b)  The person designated as animal control officer by Grady County or the City of Cairo is hereby designated the dog control officer as set forth in the Dangerous Dog Control Law. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-38. - Obstruction of officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of any officer of the animal control division in the official performance of the duties as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 5-39. - Violations. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be issued a citation for that violation to appear in the municipal court of the city. The citation may be issued by a police officer or by a magistrate upon receiving the sworn statement of a designated animal control officer based upon his own personal knowledge or upon a sworn written statement of another person who witnessed the violation, in which case the animal control officer and/or witness shall be subpoenaed to testify for the city in municipal court. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Building code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Standard Building Code, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA). One (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk which will be the official copy of said code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 7-11; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 7-8-85; Ord. No. 334, § 1, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 501, § 1, 1-12-98) 
State Law reference— Building, etc., codes, OCGA § 8-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-2. - Exceptions to Standard Building Code. 
Section 105.5 of the Standard Building Code is repealed in its entirety in lieu thereof a new section 105 is hereby adopted which section should read as follows: 
Section 105.1 Appointment. 
There is established a board to be called, "board of adjustments and appeals," which shall consist of the governing body of the City of Cairo. 
Section 1209.1 of the Standard Building Code is repealed in its entirety and in lieu thereof a new Section 1209.1 is hereby adopted which section shall read as follows: 
An accessible shut-off valve controlling delivery to a service shall be provided on the consumer's premises within three (3) feet of the water meter on the distribution pipe. Such valve shall be located and accessible in a valve box with a readily removable access cover which extends to grade level. When drain valves are provided for the distribution piping or other portion of the water supply system, such drains shall be above grade or otherwise located to prevent the possibility of backflow into the piping system after the system has been drained. 
(Code 1965, § 7-13; Ord. No. 157, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-70; Ord. No. 334, § 2, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 442, § 1, 3-13-95) 
Sec. 6-3. - Water and sewer connections. 
No building permit shall be issued by the building official for the erection of any residence or dwelling house within the city unless the plans and specifications thereof include proper sanitary water and sewer connections, provided the location at which such residence is to be built is accessible to a sewer line. 
(Code 1965, § 7-19) 
Cross reference— Sewer connections, §§ 12-60 et seq., 13-2 et seq., 13-20 et seq. 
Sec. 6-4. - Permit required. 
No person shall construct, alter, repair, remove or demolish a building, swimming pool, manufactured home, or structure including perform any electrical work or wiring, install, enlarge, repair, move or replace the gas system, mechanical system, plumbing or sewage system, or roof of any building or structure that may be regulated by this Code without first making application to the building inspector and obtaining the proper permit for the work. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 2, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 6-4.1. - Bond requirements. 
No license holder shall be required to maintain a bond with surety or sureties payable to the city in a sum in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) notwithstanding the number of licenses or types of licenses held by the license holder. The license holder shall fully comply with each requirement regarding maintenance of a bond contained within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1, 3-13-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 442, § 1, adopted Mar. 13, 1995, added provisions pertaining to bond requirements, and designated such provisions as § 6-4. Such section was renumbered as § 6-4.1 in order to avoid duplicate section numbers. 
Sec. 6-5. - House mover's insurance. 
Any person who desires a permit to move any house or building along any street or public way of the city to furnish satisfactory proof to the building official at the time such person applies for the moving permit that such person has liability insurance covering any moving operation carried on in the city for one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to any one person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to any two (2) or more persons and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage. The proof of such insurance may be made by producing the original policy or by submitting a separate certificate from the insurance agent or company that such person has a liability policy with such coverage. 
(Ord. No. 187, § 1, 9-25-72) 
Sec. 6-6. - Building numbers. 
(a)  The plan for numbering buildings within the city is as follows: 
(1)  Even numbers shall be placed on the east side of all streets running north from the CSX Railroad and on the west side of all streets running south from the CSX Railroad. 
(2)  Odd numbers shall be placed on the west side of all streets running north from CSX Railroad and on the east side of all streets running south from CSX Railroad. 
(3)  Even numbers shall be placed on the south side of all streets running east from Broad Street and on the north side of all streets running west from Broad Street. 
(4)  Odd numbers shall be placed on the north side of all streets running east from Broad Street and on the south side of all streets running west from Broad Street. 
(5)  Not more than one hundred (100) numbers shall be used to the block and each block shall commence with the next succeeding one hundred (100). 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or occupant of any dwelling house or other building to affix or inscribe the proper numbers thereon in plain and legible letters at least two (2) inches in length in a conspicuous place in front of the building or dwelling house. Yard markers may be used in lieu of the above. 
(c)  Whenever any dwelling house or building shall be without numbers or shall have incorrect numbers affixed or inscribed thereon, it shall be the duty of the city manager or his designated representative, to serve on the owner, agent or occupant, a written or printed notice notifying the owner, agent or occupant to affix or inscribe, within ten (10) days from the date of service of such notice, on the dwelling house or building owned by him or for which he may be the agent in any capacity or the occupant, the proper numbers as designated in the notice. 
(d)  The owners, agents or occupants of dwelling houses or buildings which are without numbers, or which are incorrectly numbered, may apply to the building inspector for assignment of correct number. 
(e)  Where the owner, agent or occupant of any such dwelling house or building shall neglect or refuse to affix or inscribe the proper numbers to the dwelling house or building after being duly notified as herein provided, such owner, agent or occupant may be fined not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and the numbers ordered affixed or inscribed by an official of the city. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take down, alter, injure or deface any street sign, or any number affixed or inscribed as herein provided. 
(g)  For the violation of this section the person violating same, or in the case of a corporation, its agents or employees, shall upon conviction therefore be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(h)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 7-23-90) 
Sec. 6-7. - Registration and fee schedule. 
The following schedule of permit fees is hereby adopted: 
(1)  Minimum fee: The base minimum fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for any permit issued except that the minimum fee for roof replacement shall be ten dollars ($10.00). All charges set forth hereinafter shall be in addition to the base minimum fee. 
(2)  Fees to be charged: 
a.  Permit fees. 

 
b.  Moving fees. For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall be $100.00. 
c.  Demolition fees. For the demolition of any building or structures, the fee shall be: 

 
d.  Roof replacement fees. For the re-roofing or replacement of any building or structure, the fee shall be one cent ($0.01) per square foot of roof replaced. 
(3)  Electrical permits: 
Wiring 
Outlets, receptacles, wall switches fixtures, each ..... $  0.20 
Motors 
Less than 5 hp ..... 2.00 
5 hp through 25 hp ..... 6.00 
Over 25 hp through 40 hp ..... 10.00 
Over 40 hp ..... 25.00 
Generators 
600 volts or less, not over 1kw ..... 3.00 
600 volts or less, over 1kw ..... 10.00 
Over 600 volts ..... 25.00 
Services 
Temporary or construction ..... 5.00 
200 amps or less ..... 10.00 
Over 200 amps but less than 600 amps ..... 15.00 
Over 600 amps ..... 25.00 
Plus, for each 100 amps or fraction thereof over 600 amps ..... 1.20 
Transformers 
Not exceeding 600 volts ..... 3.00 
Exceeding 600 volts ..... 7.00 
Alternate method: There shall be a charge of two cents ($0.02) per square foot for all commercial buildings of $100,000.00 value and above, or the contractor shall have the option of using the alternate method of computing actual fixture counts in accordance with the above schedule. 
Subpanel 
Base charge ..... 5.00 
(4)  Plumbing: 
For each plumbing fixture, floor drain ..... $ 2.00 
(5)  Mechanical: 
Fee schedule available upon request at building department. 
(6)  Gas: 
Gas piping for first fixture ..... 5.00 
Gas piping for each additional fixture ..... 2.00 
(7)  Reinspections: Where inspections are required, the inspection and the first reinspection shall be at no cost; for each and every reinspection thereafter, there shall be paid a reinspection fee of $25.00; however, the building official may waive the reinspection fee if he determines that the reinspection was not required. 
(8)  Certificates of occupancy: The issuance of certificate of occupancy shall be at no cost except as follows: 
a.  Temporary certificates of occupancy ..... 10.00 
b.  Certificates of occupancy required for existing buildings for which a building permit has not been issued ..... 15.00 
(9)  [Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 440, § 3, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 525, § 1, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 634, § 1, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 682, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 6-8. - Penalty for violation. 
Enforcement of the various portions of chapter 6 including the various code provisions adopted by reference shall be by the building inspector or designated employees of the City of Cairo. Inspections regarding compliance with this chapter shall be at such times and locations as the city building inspector or designated employees shall determine. Failure to comply with this code shall permit the building inspector or designated employees to issue citation to the municipal court for violation of the code(s). Punishment shall be in accordance with section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Procedures regarding prosecution of violations shall be established within the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 429, § 1, 4-11-94; Ord. No. 501, § 16, 1-12-98) 
Editor's note— Provisions of Ord. No. 429, § 1, adopted Apr. 11, 1994, which pertaining to penalty for violation, were designated as § 6-7. The editor has redesignated such provisions as § 6-8 in order to avoid duplicate section numbers. 
Secs. 6-9—6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-20. - Electrical inspector designated. 
The office of electrical inspector shall be performed by the building official or someone duly authorized as such by, and under control and direction of, the building official. 
(Code 1965, § 10-2) 
Sec. 6-21. - Promulgation of rules and regulations; supervision of electrical work. 
All electrical work and wiring done within the city, or outside the city when performed on buildings served by the city electrical distribution system, shall be under the rules and regulations promulgated by the governing body and under the direction of the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1965, § 10-5) 
Sec. 6-22. - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all installations of electrical material, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures and apparatus, herein referred to as "electrical equipment," within or on public and private buildings, structures and premises, with the following general exceptions: 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to installations in mines, ships, railway cars, automotive equipment, or the installation of equipment in or on buildings or on premises of electrical railway companies used exclusively for the conduct of their business. 
(2)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to installations used by electricity supply or communication agencies in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, or for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence, in the exercise of their function as such agencies and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose. 
(3)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio transmission, or other electrical equipment for radio transmission in amateur radio transmitting stations, and all electrical equipment used for power supply to radio transmitting equipment. 
(Code 1965, § 10-3) 
Sec. 6-23. - Standards for electrical work; adoption of electrical code. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article all installations of electrical equipment shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article and the statutes of the state, any order, rules, and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical standards for safety to persons and property. 
(b)  Where no specified standards are prescribed by this article, or statues of the State of Georgia, or by any orders, rules or regulations issued by authorities thereof, conformity with the regulations set forth within the N.F.P.A. National Electric Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) shall be prima facia evidence of conformity with the previous standards for safety to person(s) or property; which code is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of clerk of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 10-4; Ord. No. 207, § 1, 12-5-73; Ord. No. 334, § 4, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 440, § 4, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 501, § 2, 1-12-98) 
State Law reference— State code, OCGA § 8-2-20. 
Sec. 6-24. - Construction of television antennas near power lines. 
No person shall construct, build, erect or maintain a television or other communication antenna in such a manner or location that if it should fall it would fall across any city line above one hundred twenty (120) volts to ground. 
(Code 1965, § 10-69) 
Sec. 6-25. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any ruling or order of the electrical inspector shall have the right of appeal to the governing body, which ruling upon review shall be final. 
(Code 1965, § 10-6) 
Secs. 6-26—6-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATION OF ELECTRICIANS 

Sec. 6-30. - License required; fee as prescribed. 
Every person to whom a state certificate of competency has been issued shall pay to the city the registration fee provided within the building code. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10-26, 10-33; Ord. No. 440, § 5, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 6-31. - State certificate required. 
Any person desiring to engage within the city for work at electrical work or wiring shall be required to hold a state license signifying competency. The clerk shall only register those applicants exhibiting a state certificate certifying to competency of the applicant to perform. 
(Code 1965, § 10-22; Ord. No. 440, § 6, 12-12-94) 
State Law reference— Electrical contractors, plumbers and conditioned air contractors, OCGA § 43-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-32. - All work performed by or under direction of licensee. 
No electrical work or wiring shall be performed anywhere within the city, or outside the city when performed on buildings served by the city electrical distribution system, except by or under the direction of a master electrician. 
(Code 1965, § 10-34) 
Sec. 6-33. - Allowing use of name by another. 
No licensed electrician shall allow such electrician's name to be used by any person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit or to do any work under such electrician's license. 
(Code 1965, § 10-35) 
Sec. 6-34. - Bond—Required; conditions. 
(a)  Before any person shall be issued a license under this division, such person shall execute a bond with a surety or sureties, payable to the city, in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned to protect the city against all loss or damage occasioned by the negligence of the principal therein in failing to properly execute and protect all work done by such person or by such person's employees, or under such person's direction or supervision, and from all loss or damage occasioned by or arising in any manner from any such work done by such principal or principal's employees or under principal's direction or supervision, which is not caused by the negligence of the city or its agents or employees; conditioned further, that the principal therein shall keep and observe all ordinances at any time enacted by the city relating in any way to electrical work and wiring. 
(b)  Such bond shall be further conditioned that such person shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the work is done, remedy any defects therein due to faulty workmanship and incorrect construction or due to faulty material furnished or used by such person and that such person shall reconstruct and repair such work to the satisfaction of the electrical inspector at any time within one year after the construction, repair, or installation thereof, and after forty-eight (48) hours' notice from the electrical inspector to reconstruct or repair the same. 
(Code 1965, § 10-29; Ord. No. 443, § 1, 3-13-95) 
Sec. 6-35. - Same—Approval. 
The bond shall be approved by the city attorney and city clerk before it becomes effective. 
(Code 1965, § 10-30) 
Sec. 6-36. - Same—Suing on. 
The bond may be sued on in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state. 
(Code 1965, § 10-31) 
Sec. 6-37. - Same—Expiration. 
(a)  All bonds shall expire no sooner than one (1) year from the date of issue, and no bond shall be null and void until all liability thereon has been adjusted, settled and extinguished. 
(b)  No electrical work or wiring shall be performed by, nor shall any permit be issued to, a master electrician unless such electrician shall have a valid bond in full force and effect. 
(Code 1965, § 10-32; Ord. No. 461, § 2, 3-11-96) 
Sec. 6-38. - Revocation of registration. 
Any person who shall continue persistently to violate the provisions of this article and the lawful orders of the electrical inspector shall be subject to have his registration revoked. 
(Code 1965, § 10-28; Ord. No. 440, § 7, 12-12-94) 
Secs. 6-39—6-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 6-44. - Permit required. 
No person shall do any electrical work or wiring of any character, make any change, extension, or disconnect wiring, or change the location of any fixture or service connection without having in such person's possession a permit from the building inspector. 
(Code 1965, § 10-41; Ord. No. 440, § 8, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 6-45. - Permit application—City to furnish forms. 
Forms for application for electrical permits shall be furnished by the city. 
(Code 1965, § 10-42) 
Sec. 6-46. - Same—Contents; accompanying schedules. 
(a)  An application for an electrical permit, describing the work to be done, shall be made in writing to the electrical inspector by the electrician who will install the work. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by such specifications and schedules as will allow the electrical inspector to determine whether the installation will be in conformity with the requirements of this article and, when deemed necessary by the inspector, the application shall be accompanied by drawings. 
Code 1965, § 10-43) 
Sec. 6-47. - Issuance of permit—Upon compliance. 
If the electrical inspector shall find that the proposed installation conforms with all legal requirements and if the applicant has complied with the provisions of this article, a permit for such installation shall be issued. 
(Code 1965, § 10-45) 
Sec. 6-48. - Same—To whom. 
A permit to do electrical work or wiring shall be issued only to a master electrician possessing a valid license. 
(Code 1965, § 10-46) 
Sec. 6-49. - Deviations from permit. 
No deviation shall be made from the installation described in the permit without the express approval of the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1965, § 10-47) 
Sec. 6-50. - Annual permit under certain conditions. 
(a)  In lieu of an individual permit for each installation or alteration, an annual permit shall, upon application therefor, be issued to any person regularly employing one or more electricians for the installation, alteration and maintenance of electrical equipment in or on buildings or premises owned or occupied by the applicant for the permit. 
(b)  The application for an annual permit shall be made in writing to the electrical inspector and shall contain a description of the premises on which work is to be done under the permit. 
(c)  The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a record of all electrical equipment installed under such permit, and the electrical inspector shall have access to such records. 
(d)  Each annual permit shall expire on the thirty-first day of March next after issuance. 
(Code 1965, § 10-48) 
Secs. 6-51, 6-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 440, § 9, adopted Dec. 12, 1994, provided that §§ 6-51 and 6-52 be stricken from the Code. Formerly, such sections pertained to inspection fees as derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 10-57 and 10-58. 
Sec. 6-53. - Inspection prior to concealment. 
When any electrical equipment authorized by an individual permit or an annual permit is to be concealed against inspection by the permanent placement of parts of a building, the person installing the equipment shall notify the electrical inspector, and such equipment shall not be concealed until after it has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1965, § 10-60) 
Sec. 6-54. - Notifications to electrical inspector for final inspection. 
Upon completion of the wiring of any building for light, heat or power, the person performing the work shall notify the electrical inspector, who shall inspect such wiring and appliances. 
(Code 1965, § 10-59) 
Sec. 6-55. - Certificates of satisfactory inspection—Issuance. 
(a)  If the electrical inspector shall approve any installation inspected, such inspector shall issue a certificate of satisfactory inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection. 
(b)  No certificate of satisfactory inspection shall be issued unless electrical wiring and appliance has been found to be in strict conformity to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 10-61) 
Sec. 6-56. - Same—Required before turning on current. 
No current shall be turned on for any installation until a certificate of satisfactory inspection has been issued. 
(Code 1965, § 10-62) 
Sec. 6-57. - Failure to remedy defects. 
Any person who shall fail to correct any defect in such person's work after having been duly notified by the electrical inspector, in addition to being subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8, shall receive no further permits until such defect has been corrected. 
(Code 1965, § 10-63) 
Secs. 6-58—6-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 501, § 3, adopted Jan. 12, 1998, deleted Art. III, Gas, being §§ 6-60, 6-61, 6-70—6-94, and 6-100—6-107. For derivation of this article, the user's attention is directed to the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume.   Subsequently, Ord. No. 779, adopted Feb. 8, 2016, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 6-70. - Residential buildings containing less than seven hundred square feet. 
Residential buildings containing less than seven hundred (700) square feet are permitted within the City of Cairo upon the following conditions: 
(1)  All residences shall be located within zoning area R-1. 
(2)  Subject to the requirement of section 22-15, substandard lots, all residences shall be located on a lot of the minimum size of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(3)  The person or entity desiring to build the residence shall present with the application to construct the residence a floor plan sited on a plat of survey dated within six (6) months of the application. 
(4)  The residence shall be connected to the electric system, water system and sanitary sewer system of the City of Cairo. 
(5)  The floor plan and subsequent construction shall provide a location for a refrigerator and stove/oven. 
(6)  All residences shall meet current building code requirements of the City of Cairo including required doorways and windows. 
(7)  Each person who is a permanent resident shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space. 
(Ord. No. 779, 2-8-16) 
Secs. 6-71—6-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Associated Codes and Standards adopted, § 6-250. 

Sec. 6-110. - Housing code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Standard Housing Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of clerk of the city which shall be the official copy of the said code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 17-1; Ord. No. 159, § 2, 4-13-70; Ord. No. 286, § 3, 7-8-85; Ord. No. 334, § 6, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 440, § 12, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 501, § 4, 1-12-98) 
State Law reference— Repair, etc., of unfit dwellings, OCGA, § 36-61-11. 
Sec. 6-111. - Amendments to housing code. 
The housing code hereinabove adopted by reference, is hereby amended in the following particulars: 
Section 106.1 is repealed in its entirety and in lieu thereof a new section is hereby adopted, which shall read as follows: 
"106.1 There is hereby established in the city a board to be called the housing board of adjustments and appeals, which shall consist of the governing body of the city." 
Section 106.2 is repealed in its entirety and in lieu thereof a new section is hereby adopted, which shall read as follows: 
"106.2 The governing body of the city shall serve as members of the housing board of adjustments and appeals for terms concurrent with their respective terms of office as mayor and council member. Vacancies, when they occur, shall be filled when vacancies in the offices of mayor and council member are filled in the manner provided by the charter of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 17-2) 
Secs. 6-112—6-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-120. - Compliance with article. 
All plumbing done within the city shall be done under the rules and regulations set out in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 25-1; Ord. No. 166, § 1, 12-14-70) 
Sec. 6-121. - Plumbing inspector. 
All plumbing done in the city, or outside the city when the work is or shall be connected to the sewer system or water system of the city, shall be done under the direction of the plumbing inspector. Whenever in this article, the term "inspector" or "plumbing inspector" is used, it shall mean the building official or someone duly authorized by the building official as such inspector. 
(Code 1965, §§ 25-2, 25-3(1); Ord. No. 166, § 2, 12-14-70) 
Sec. 6-122. - Appeals. 
Any person shall have the right of appeal from any ruling of the plumbing inspector to the governing body, which ruling shall be final. 
(Code 1965, § 25-3(3)) 
Sec. 6-123. - Plumbing code adopted by reference. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all installations of plumbing and all materials used shall be in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the state and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof; and with approved plumbing standards for safety to persons and property. Where no specific standards are prescribed by this article or by the statutes of the state or by any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof, conformity with the provisions of the latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) of the Standard Plumbing Code shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to persons or to property. Such code is hereby adopted by reference as fully as if set out at length herein, subject however, to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances. One copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk which shall be the official copy of said code and so designated by said city clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 25-60; Ord. No. 159, § 3, 4-13-70; Ord. No. 286, § 4, 7-8-85; Ord. No. 334, § 7, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 440, § 13, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 501, § 5, 1-12-98) 
State Law reference— State code, OCGA, § 8-2-20. 
Sec. 6-124. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 501, § 6, adopted Jan. 12, 1998, provided for the deletion of § 6-124, water conservation fixtures, derived from Ord. No. 392, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 1991. 
Sec. 6-125. - Election to exempt from state provisions. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in section 3 of Act No. 1046 and enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia during the 1996 session of the legislature, section (d) of Code section 8-2-26 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. section 8-2-26(d)) relating to self inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Secs. 6-126—6-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATION OF PLUMBERS 

Sec. 6-130. - Certificate and registration required. 
Every master plumber desiring to do business in the city shall be the holder of a valid and current certificate of competency issued by the state board of examiners of plumbing contractors and shall register with the city clerk as provided by this Code before engaging in plumbing business in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 25-25; Ord. No. 166, § 4, 12-14-70; Ord. No. 440, § 15, 12-12-94) 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses, § 14-13; septic tank cleaner regulations, § 14-16. 
State Law reference— Plumbers, OCGA § 43-14-1. 
Sec. 6-131. - Bond. 
(a)  Every master plumber shall execute a bond with surety, payable to the city in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned to protect the city against all loss or damage occasioned by the negligence of the principal therein in failing to properly execute and protect all work done by such principal or employees of such principal, or under such principal's direction or supervision; from all loss or damage occasioned by or arising in any manner from any such work which is not caused by the negligence of the city or its agents or employees; that principal will keep and observe all provisions of this Code and all ordinances at any time enacted by the city relating to plumbing; that the principal shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the work is done, remedy any defects therein due to faulty workmanship or incorrect construction or due to faulty material furnished or used; that the principal shall reconstruct and repair such work to the satisfaction of the plumbing inspector at any time within one year after the construction, repair or installation thereof, and after forty-eight (48) hours' notice from the plumbing inspector. 
(b)  The bond shall be approved by the city attorney and city clerk before it becomes effective, and may be sued on, in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state. 
(Code 1965, § 25-26; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-13-95) 
Sec. 6-132. - Allowing use of name by another. 
No licensed plumber shall allow such plumber's name to be used by any person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit or to do any plumbing work. 
(Code 1965, § 25-28) 
Secs. 6-133—6-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Sewer connections, §§ 12-60 et seq., 13-2 et seq., 13-20 et seq. 

Sec. 6-140. - Scope of work under permit; city performing work beyond property line. 
(a)  Work to be done under a plumbing permit is all of that work beyond the street line or property line. 
(b)  The city shall make all connections to the city sewer, make all excavations, lay all pipe, and repair all paving necessary to construct the sewer line to the street line or property line. 
(Code 1965, § 25-53(1), (2) 
Sec. 6-141. - Separate plumbing system for separate buildings. 
(a)  The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new work installed in existing buildings shall be separate from and independent of that of any other building, except as provided in this section, and every building shall have an independent connection with a public or private sewer when available. 
(b)  Where one building stands in the rear of another building on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the house drain from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole will be considered as one house drain, provided both properties are owned by the same person. 
(Code 1965, § 25-59) 
Sec. 6-142. - Inspection fees. 
There shall be charged and collected by the city an inspection fee for all new, old and remodeled plumbing inspected by the plumbing inspector as set forth within this code. 
(Code 1965, § 25-51; Ord. No. 440, § 15, 12-12-94) 
Secs. 6-143—6-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL 

Sec. 6-150. - Mechanical code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Standard Mechanical Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 5, 7-8-85; Ord. No. 334, § 8, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 440, § 16, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 501, § 7, 1-12-98) 
Secs. 6-151—6-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 6-160. - Swimming pool code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Standard Swimming Pool Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 6, 7-8-85; Ord. No. 440, § 17, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 501, § 8, 1-12-98) 
Sec. 6-161. - Temporary enclosure required; inspection of construction; penalties. 
(a)  At such time as the swimming pool construction permit is obtained, the permanent fence construction permit shall also be obtained by the person(s) receiving the swimming pool construction permit. 
(b)  Upon obtaining the proper permits and before the construction of a swimming pool has begun, the property owner shall construct a fence/barrier of a temporary or permanent type that shall generally conform with the requirements of a permanent fence/barrier required upon completion of the swimming pool. 
(c)  The permanent fence/barrier that is required pursuant to the standard swimming pool code shall be constructed and in its final form prior to the final inspection of the swimming pool by the city building inspector and issuance of the certificate of completion. 
(d)  The failure of the property owner to comply with the provisions of this article or any other portion of the requirements regarding construction of a swimming pool of barrier shall result in a fine in the amount of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that the property owner shall fail to comply with the requirements of this ordinance shall be deemed a separate and independent offense. 
(Ord. No. 534, § 1, 7-24-2000) 
Secs. 6-162—6-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ELIMINATION OR REPAIR OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 6-170. - Unsafe building abatement code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Unsafe Building Abatement Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 7, 7-8-85; Ord. No. 501, § 9, 1-12-98) 
Secs. 6-171—6-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EXCAVATION AND GRADING 

Sec. 6-180. - Excavation and grading code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Standard Excavation and Grading Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 501, § 10, 1-12-98) 
Cross reference— Excavation in streets, §§ 13-20, 18-1, 18-2. 
Secs. 6-181—6-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 6-190. - Amusement device code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Standard Amusement [Devices] Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 7-8-85; Ord. No. 334, § 9, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 501, § 11, 1-12-98) 
Secs. 6-191—6-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - EXISTING BUILDINGS 

Secs. 6-201—6-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 399, § 1, adopted May 13, 1991, added new provisions to Ch. 6 as Art. XI, § 6-200, and Art. XII, § 6-210; as provisions already existed within Ch. 6 as Art. XI, § 6-200, said provisions of Ord. No. 399 have been redesignated as Art. XII, § 6-210, and Art. XIII, § 6-220, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-210. - CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 399, § 1, 5-13-91; Ord. No. 440, § 18, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 461, § 3, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 501, § 12, 1-12-98) 
Secs. 6-211—6-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ENERGY CODE FOR BUILDINGS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. XII of this Chapter. 

Sec. 6-220. - Energy code for buildings adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 399, § 1, 5-13-91; Ord. No. 440, § 19, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 501, § 13, 1-12-98) 
Secs. 6-221—6-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Manufactured and mobile homes, Ch. 23. 

Sec. 6-240. - Code for Manufactured Housing adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Manufactured Housing Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the GeorgiaDepartment of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 21, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 501, § 14, 1-12-98) 
Cross reference— Manufactured and mobile homes, Ch. 23. 
Secs. 6-241—6-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT CODE 

Sec. 6-250. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in this Code of Ordinances, that certain published code known as the Southern Building Code Congress International Standard for Flood Plain Management Code, latest edition as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) one (1) copy of which is on file with the office of clerk of the city, which shall be the official copy of such code and so designated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 461, § 4, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 501, § 15, 1-12-98) 
Cross reference— Housing code adopted and amended, §§ 6-110, 6-111; swimming pool code adopted, § 6-160; unsafe building abatement code adopted, § 6-170; amusement device code adopted, § 6-190; noise prohibitions, §§ 12-6, 12-7. 
Sec. 6-251. - Flood damage prevention. 
(a)  Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(1)  Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Cairo, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(2)  Findings of fact. 
a.  The flood hazard areas of Cairo, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
b.  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(3)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
a.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
b.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
c.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
d.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
e.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Objectives. The objectives of this section are: 
a.  To protect human life and health; 
b.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
c.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
d.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
e.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
f.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
g.  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Lands to which this section applies. This section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Cairo, Georgia. 
(2)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated August 18, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this section. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 18, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Grady County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: City Hall, 119 North Broad Street, Cairo, Georgia, 39828 
(3)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this section prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(4)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
(5)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing section, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(6)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(7)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the City of Cairo or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(8)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Cairo from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(c)  Administration. 
(1)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the city manager on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
a.  Application stage. 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
3.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection (d)(2)b.; 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
b.  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The city manager shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(3)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the city manager shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
b.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
c.  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
d.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection (b)(1), then the city manager shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of subsection (d). 
e.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection (c)(2)b. 
f.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection (c)(2)b. 
g.  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city manager shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection (c)(2)a.3. and subsection (d)(2)b. or (4)b. 
h.  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
i.  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
j.  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
k.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
l.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this section shall be maintained in the office of the city manger and shall be open for public inspection. 
(d)  Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(1)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
c.  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
d.  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
1.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
2.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this section, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
3.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
e.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
f.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
g.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
h.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
i.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
j.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this section, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(2)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
a.  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (d)(1)d., "Elevated buildings." 
1.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection (c)(3)f. 
c.  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
1.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
3.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (ref. subsection (d)(1)f. above). 
4.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
i.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
ii.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
iii.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (d)(2)1. [and] c. above. 
d.  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection (b)(2), are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
2.  Only if subsection (d)(2)d.1. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection (d). 
(3)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection (b)(2), where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
a.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection (b)(2), then the city manager shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of subsection (d). Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (b. and c.) shall apply: 
b.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
c.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one (1) foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (d)(1)d., "Elevated buildings." 
1.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The city manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(4)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection (b)(2), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
b.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection (d)(2). 
(5)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection (b)(2) may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (d)(1)d., "Elevated buildings." 
The city manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
b.  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections (c)(2)a.4. and (c)(2)b. 
c.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(6)  Standards for subdivisions. 
a.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
d.  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(7)  Standards for critical facilities. 
a.  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
b.  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(e)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  The Cairo City Council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this section. 
(2)  The Cairo City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city manager in the enforcement or administration of this section. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Cairo City County may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Grady County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this subsection are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the Cairo City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other subsections of this section. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
b.  The provisions of this subsection are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The city manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this section, the Cairo City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this subsection. 
(d)  Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager's interpretation of any provision of this section. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in subsection (b)(2). 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1—A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1—A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1—V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 1, 1986. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 25, 1986. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean Sea Level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 1, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 25, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after August 25, 1986. 
North America Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any section requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two (2) or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this section, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this section. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this section is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 713, § 1, 8-10-09) 
Secs. 6-252—6-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 753, adopted Nov. 25, 2013, repealed the former Art. XVI, §§ 6-276—6-284, and enacted a new Art. XVI as set out herein. The former Art. XVI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 601, §§ I—IX, adopted Nov. 11, 2003. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Excavation and grading, § 6-180 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 19. 

Sec. 6-276. - Title. 
This article will be known as City of Cairo Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-277. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Flint River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 6-279(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 6-278(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carryout activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Flint River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing longterm vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-278. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 6-279(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-279. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 6-279(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections 6-279(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 6-279(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (16) of this section, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 6-27(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-280. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of City of Cairo without first obtaining a permit from the building department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 6-280(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 6-279(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three (3) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for each acre or fraction therefore in the project area. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 6-279(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 6-280(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 6-279(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 6-279(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 6-280(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-281. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The building department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-282. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; [and] 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one (1) under the provisions of subsection 6-280(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-283. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-284. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within fifteen (15) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Grady County. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Sec. 6-285. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the twenty-fifth day of November, 2013. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 1, 11-25-13) 
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations as trustees for cemeteries, OCGA § 36-37-4 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Permit to dig grave. 
No person shall dig, or cause to be dug, or direct or permit or allow to be dug any grave in a city cemetery upon any lot owned or controlled by such person without first obtaining a permit from the cemetery supervisor or such other person as may be authorized by the city manager showing the exact location of such grave. The city shall mark the four (4) corners of the grave space. Upon request by the funeral director, the city shall mark the location of interment but the city assumes no responsibility for ascertaining the proper location. 
(Code 1965, § 8-3; Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 515, 2-8-99) 
Sec. 7-2. - Permit to erect tombstones, etc. 
No person shall erect, place or cause to be erected or placed any monument or tombstone or any curbing or coping in any city cemetery without first obtaining a permit to do so from the cemetery supervisor or such other person as may be authorized by the city manager showing the exact location thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 8-5; Ord. No. 421, § 2, 11-23-92) 
Sec. 7-3. - Digging in walkways, etc. 
No person shall dig, or direct or instruct any person to dig any grave in any city cemetery of the city in any walkway, driveway or passageway, or erect any tombstone, monument, curbing or coping in any of the walkways, driveways, or passageways of the cemetery. 
(Code 1965, § 8-4) 
Sec. 7-4. - Using cemetery as walkway. 
No person shall walk across or use as a walkway any part of any cemetery grounds in the city except the regular driveways, within the cemetery or except on regularly designated and established walkways between the private burial lots in the cemetery, nor shall any person park a vehicle thereon. 
(Code 1965, § 8-1) 
Sec. 7-5. - Vaults. 
All interments hereafter made shall be in outer burial containers, sometimes called vaults, of concrete or stronger substance (such as stainless steel). The vault shall not be required for an indigent burial. (Indigence to be certified by Georgia Department of Family and Children Services.) The city will allow the use of a box in lieu of a vault. 
(Ord No. 515, 2-8-99) 
Sec. 7-6. - Supervision of sales; custodian of cemetery plats. 
The city clerk shall handle all sales of cemetery lots and shall be the custodian of the master maps or plats of cemeteries located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 2, 4-22-91) 
Sec. 7-7. - Cost of cemetery lots. 
Cemetery lots located within the city shall be sold at the prices established by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 2, 4-22-91) 
Sec. 7-8. - Approval of conveyances. 
(a)  No conveyance after the initial purchase of a lot in any cemetery shall be made without approval of the city. 
(b)  The charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each conveyance and legal and recording fees that may be incurred by the city shall be charged to the purchaser and collected by the city. 
(c)  There will be no swapping of cemetery lots within the city owned cemeteries. If so desired after the purchase of a lot the purchaser may resell the lot to a third party at which time there will be an administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and any associated legal and recording fees. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 2, 4-22-91; Ord. No. 585, § 1, 12-9-02) 
Sec. 7-9. - Eligibility to purchase lot; cost of lot. 
Cemetery lots shall be sold without regard to residency of purchases as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 599 § 1, 10-13-03; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 760, § 1, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 7-10. - Regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to all city owned cemeteries: 
(1)  There shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches of ground cover over each vault. 
(2)  All graves should be water packed if buried underground. 
(3)  All excavation material shall be removed from the cemetery lot and placed at a location designated by the city. 
(4)  Two (2) infant burials may occur on the same lot if vaults total less than eight (8) feet in length. 
(5)  Any child vault over four (4) feet in length shall be buried in one (1) grave space. 
(6)  There will be a record fee charge for each grave space or lot sold in any cemetery. 
(7)  Upon the following conditions, the city shall permit up to six (6) infants to be buried within a lot: 
a.  The casket shall be less than two (2) feet in length. 
b.  The Department of Family and Children Services shall certify the parents of the infant to be indigent. 
c.  The city shall permit the use of a box in lieu of a vault. 
(8)  There shall be a maximum of two (2) cremation burials in each grave space. 
(9)  All vaults shall be properly sealed. 
(10)  All cemeteries shall be open to the public from sunrise until sunset daily. 
(Ord. No. 617, § 1, 7-12-04; Ord. No. 628, § 1, 8-22-04; Ord. No. 638, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 639, § 1, 5-8-06) 
Sec. 7-11. - Policy regarding grave adornment or decoration. 
Grave sites may be decorated in a manner that is not generally offensive to public taste in such manner as interested parties desire. Such adornment or decoration shall be within the grave site area and shall in no manner obstruct or interfere with the maintenance of the cemetery. Adornment or decoration shall be the sole responsibility of the person or entity placing same. Such decoration or adornment may be removed by the City of Cairo if same shall be offensive, or interfere with the maintenance of the cemetery. The City of Cairo shall have no liability regarding the damage or destruction of grave adornment or decoration unless the City of Cairo shall have intentionally or by gross negligence damaged or destroyed the adornment or decoration. 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 6-26-08) 
Secs. 7-12—7-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GREENWOOD CEMETERY AND CRESTVIEW CEMETERY 

Sec. 7-20. - Greenwood Cemetery and Crestview Cemetery designated. 
The cemetery located on the Thomasville-Cairo Highway lying in the northeastern section of the city, is hereby designated as Greenwood Cemetery, and Crestview Cemetery is located adjacent to and north of Greenwood Cemetery. 
(Code 1965, § 8-11) 
Sec. 7-21. - Marking corner of lots. 
No coping, fence, hedge, planting, wall, ditch, bank, or enclosure of any kind or nature shall be placed, planted or used or have the appearance of being used for outlining, enclosing, marking off or making or designating any boundary line of any lot or plot in Greenwood Cemetery or Crestview Cemetery, except six-inch square white marble or concrete markers to mark the four (4) corners of any lot. The markers shall be flush with the ground and set within the boundaries of the lot. 
(Code 1965, § 8-15; Ord. No. 397, § 3, 4-22-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 397, § 1, adopted Apr. 22, 1991 amended the Code by deleting former §§ 7-21—7-23, which pertained to supervision of sales of lots and the custodian of the cemetery plat, cost of lots, and approval of conveyances, respectively, and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 8-12—8-14. Section 3 of Ord. No. 397 further amended the Code by redesignating former §§ 7-24—7-26 as 7-21—7-23 as herein set forth. 
Sec. 7-22. - Maximum height of markers. 
No tombstone, marker, monument, slab or memorial shall be more than thirty-six (36) inches in height unless same shall be in the form of a mausoleum. Design of such mausoleum shall be brought before mayor and council for approval. Upon approval, such mausoleum shall be constructed within no less than eighteen (18) months. 
(Code 1965, § 8-16; Ord. No. 397, § 3, 4-22-91; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 4-9-07) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 7-21. 
Sec. 7-23. - Provisions to be incorporated in conveyances. 
The provisions of this article pertaining to use of lots shall be incorporated in and made a part of the deed of conveyance to any lot or plot in Greenwood Cemetery or Crestview Cemetery. 
(Code 1965, § 8-17; Ord. No. 397, § 3, 4-22-91) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 7-21. 
Secs. 7-24—7-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOREST LAWN CEMETERY 

Sec. 7-30. - Forest Lawn Cemetery designated. 
The cemetery located on 11th Avenue, N.W. is hereby designated as Forest Lawn Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 4, 4-22-91) 
Sec. 7-31. - Restrictions, nature of monument permitted, etc. 
No lot shall be transferred from one party to another without approval of the city. No coping, fence, hedge, planting, wall, ditch, bank or enclosure of any kind or nature shall be placed, planted or used or have the appearance of being used for outlining, enclosing, marking off or making or designating any boundary line of any lot or plot in said cemetery. No burial vaults shall be permitted above ground level. All burial vaults shall use some type of concrete vault. All vaults must be buried eighteen (18) inches beneath the top soil. No lots shall be permitted with cement or rocks around monuments. No concrete slabs or ledgers shall be placed on grave. No monument shall exceed seventy-two (72) inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 5, 4-22-91) 
Sec. 7-32. - Provisions to be incorporated in conveyances. 
The provisions of this article pertaining to use of lots shall be incorporated in and made a part of the deed of conveyance to any lot or plot in Forest Lawn Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 397, § 6, 4-22-91) 
Sec. 7-33. - Sale of lots. 
Grave spaces shall be sold only in one (1) section until such time as all grave spaces within that section have been sold. 
(Ord. No. 515, 2-8-99; Ord. No. 617, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 7-34. - Regulations regarding crypts. 
(a)  All crypts (mausoleums) shall be made of marble or granite. No concrete crypts shall be allowed. 
(b)  Crypts shall be no more than thirty-six (36) inches in height. 
(c)  All crypts must have concrete foundation and a blue print showing foundation requirements as follows: 
(1)  Concrete shall have no less than three thousand (3,000) PSI. 
(2)  Concrete shall be at least one (1) foot deep. 
(3)  Concrete shall contain one (1) inch re-bar six (6) inches up from ground level. 
(4)  Rock of number seven (7) size must be six (6) inches deep for drainage as specified in blue print. 
(5)  All crypts must face east and west. 
(Ord. No. 515, 2-8-99; Ord. No. 528, § 1, 6-13-2000; Ord. No. 617, § 2, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 7-35. - Regulations regarding columbarium. 
The city may construct, shall maintain, and does establish the following rules and guidelines regarding any columbarium located in Forest Lawn Cemetery: 
(1)  Transfer of ownership will only be allowed with written confirmation of the City of Cairo. 
(2)  The City of Cairo shall be solely responsible for the upkeep of the columbarium. The City of Cairo is not responsible or liable for theft or damage to the contents of the columbarium. 
(3)  Possession of the key to unlock each burial niche within the columbarium will be held by the City of Cairo. The provisions regarding the use of a niche shall be incorporated within the document transferring title to the niche. 
(4)  The document relating to transfer of a burial niche shall be as prescribed by the City of Cairo. 
(5)  A burial niche may only be unlocked or opened for interring cremains or upon the permanent removal of cremains before sealing. Following sealing of a niche, a niche may not be reopened. Any necessary reopening of a niche will require payment of a fee established by mayor and council. 
(6)  All burial niches must be marked when cremains are interred. All markings shall be done through the City of Cairo in such manner as the City of Cairo shall prescribe. 
(7)  The cost of a burial niche shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) and each sealing and marking of a niche as permitted shall result in a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 765, § 1, 3-23-15) 
Chapter 9 - COURT AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Recorder's court, OCGA § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-1. - Creation of court; powers; presiding officer. 
(a)  There is hereby established a court to be known as the "Municipal Court, City of Cairo," which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. 
(b)  Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of the state are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof; to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations and to prescribe the conditions of forfeiture of the same; and to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary and proper to the conduct of said court. 
(c)  The presiding officer of the court is the municipal judge who shall be known as judge of said court. 
(d)  Said court shall be convened at such times as designated in this chapter or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
(e)  The court shall sit at a place designated by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 2, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-2. - Municipal judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as municipal judge unless such person shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years, shall not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude and shall be qualified to vote in this county. Until such time that the governing body shall appoint a judge, the mayor, or in the mayor's absence the mayor pro tem shall act as judge. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the governing body. 
(b)  The judge may appoint a judge pro hac vice to serve in the absence of the judge. Said judge pro hac vice shall have the same qualifications as the judge and shall be known as associate judge of said court. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of office, the judge shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state, that such judge will truly, honestly and faithfully, discharge the duties of the office to the best of such judge's ability without fear, favor, or partiality. This oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the meeting of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 2, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The judge shall have power to impose fines, costs and forfeitures for the violation of any law or ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Said municipal court is hereby empowered to punish violators of the rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city and may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction being a fine in such amount as is permitted by state law or imprisonment for such time as is permitted by state law, or any combination of the two. Said fines may be collected by execution issued against all property of the defendant, both real and personal, if any to be found. 
(c)  Said judge shall have the authority to punish for contempt by imposing a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or any combination of the two (2). The judge shall be, to all intents and purposes, a justice of the peace, so far as to enable such judge to issue warrants for offenses committed within the limits of the city, and to commit the offenders to jail or admit them to bail in bailable cases for their appearance at a regularly scheduled term of court of competent jurisdiction to be held in the city. 
(d)  The court shall also have concurrent jurisdiction with that of a justice of the peace over offenses against the criminal laws of the state committed within the corporate limits. 
(e)  Except as may be herein otherwise specified, the court is specifically invested with all jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area within the corporate limits granted by state laws generally to mayors, municipal, recorders', and police courts, and particularly such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
(f)  Said judge is hereby authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 2, 6-29-82; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 782, § 1, 4-25-16) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to instructions from the city, the fine of "six hundred dollars ($600.00)" in subsection (b) of § 9-3 has been changed to read "one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)," thereby reflecting the maximum amount of fine as set forth in § 8 of Art. No. 275 of the 1985 General Assembly. 
Sec. 9-4. - Right of appeal. 
The right of appeal and procedures pertaining to appeal bonds to the superior court from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the court of probate. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding, and the city shall be entitled to reimbursement of its costs therefor. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 2, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-5. - Court costs; issuance of process. 
(a)  In all cases in the municipal court, the costs incurred and allowable herein may be computed under the provisions of the laws of the state fixing costs in the justice of the peace courts of said state, or the governing body may establish a schedule of fees to defray costs of operation and the city shall be entitled to reimbursement of the costs, meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to the superior court for violations of state law. 
(b)  The governing body may also provide a uniform scale of costs of the clerk and police officers of said city for all services in the arrest and prosecution of offenders in the municipal court and in the issuance and collection of tax and other executions; and for their collections and payment into the city treasury. 
(c)  The judge is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses to said court and to issue such other processes as may be necessary for the proper administration of said court. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 2, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-6. - Sessions of court—Generally. 
Sessions of the municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals and held on dates and times as set by the municipal court judge and may continue from hour to hour or day to day as the business of the court may necessitate, provided, any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court and no case ready for trial. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82; Ord. No. 683, § 2, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 9-7. - Same—Special sessions. 
(a)  The judge may hold special sessions when it is determined by the judge to be necessary or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons, before the next regular sitting of the court. The necessity or urgency of the cause shall be presumed from the fact of a session being held. 
(b)  All defendants shall have at least six (6) hours notice of the session. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-8. - Rules of practice. 
(a)  Practice in the municipal court shall be governed by the rules of the superior courts of this state as far as practicable, under the ordinances and charter of the city, and, where not provided otherwise by the charter and ordinances of the city, the court may prescribe additional rules of practice where there are no rules applicable. 
(b)  The judge shall have the powers of a superior court judge to control the proceedings in said court. 
(Ord. No. 255, §§ 2, 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-9. - Court bailiff; police attendance at court. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or the chief's assistant or some member of the police force designated by the judge to attend each session of the court to act as bailiff, and the duty of each police officer making the arrest or having knowledge of the case for or against the defendant, to attend the trial of any person brought before the court. 
(b)  Any police officer who is off duty during the hours that the court is in session and has been specifically notified to be present in court as a witness by the chief of police, judge, or court clerk shall be present at the appointed date and time. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82; Ord. No. 683, § 3, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 9-10. - Clerk of court; subpoenas; dockets. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk, or an appropriate designee of the governing body, to attend each session of the municipal court and serve as clerk of court. 
(b)  The clerk of court shall: 
(1)  Prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket thereof that will show the name of the person for whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued, and to whom delivered. 
(2)  The judge may require that the clerk maintain a duplicate court docket and use the signed duplicate copy of the docket to make necessary entries in the master docket after each session of court, the master or original to be retained by the judge and the duplicate to be examined for completeness and signed by the judge. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-11. - Arrest and detention. 
Every person arrested by a police officer of the city shall be held in custody by the arresting officer by and for the city, pending disposition as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 26-18(1)) 
Sec. 9-12. - Commitment hearing; jury trial; binding over. 
(a)  All charges cognizable as violations of state laws shall be handled by a commitment hearing, provided however, that they may be adjudicated in the municipal court whenever the court would have jurisdiction over the offense, and the defendant does not demand a jury trial. 
(b)  When a defendant is bound over to the appropriate state court, such defendant may be released under any of the following methods: 
(1)  If the defendant has made bond to the city such defendant may be released on the same bond. 
(2)  If the defendant has not made bond before being bound over, such defendant shall make bond at the county jail book-in and arraignment notice will then be given to the defendant and the defendant must be delivered, in person, by the city police, to the county authorities. 
(c)  There shall be no jury trials in the municipal court; where one is required by law or where one is rightfully demanded, said case shall be bound over to the appropriate court by the municipal judge. 
(Code 1965, § 26-21; Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-13. - Appearance bond; procedure for accepting. 
Offenses against the ordinances of the city shall be bailable as follows: 
(1)  The arresting officer, chief of police, recorder or any other officer designated by the chief of police, may accept bond of the accused payable to the city conditioned upon the appearance of the accused at the next session or any subsequent session of the municipal court as stated in the bond, to answer the charge. 
(2)  The bond shall be in writing in an amount established in a schedule approved by the recorder. 
(3)  A person arrested for violation of a city ordinance may be released on such person's recognizance, may be released on bond without security or in lieu thereof may deposit cash or such person's driver's license with the arresting officer. 
(4)  Any person released under subsection (3) above shall receive a receipt for any driver's license deposited or, if released on the person's own recognizance, shall sign and receive a copy of the citation or ticket describing the violation for which the person was arrested. 
(5)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(Code 1965, § 26-19; Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-14. - Forfeiture of appearance bonds. 
(a)  The municipal judge or the judge's designee shall call the case in its regular order, and, if the accused is not in court and does not answer the call, and, if no good and sufficient reason is given for nonappearance, the judge shall enter on the docket where the case is stated "Bond forfeited," or similar words. 
(b)  Upon forfeiture of any bond, the cash deposited as security shall be paid to the city clerk, and it shall become the property of the city. 
(c)  Upon the forfeiture of any bond signed by a person as surety, the city clerk shall issue an execution against the principal and surety on the bond for the amount thereof which shall be collected as tax executions are collected. 
(Code 1965, § 26-20; Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-15. - Pleas. 
(a)  Upon a case being called, the municipal judge shall inform the defendant of the charge against such defendant and shall inquire as to how such defendant desires to plead thereon. Thereupon, the defendant shall enter one of the following pleas: 
(1)  Guilty; 
(2)  Not guilty; 
(3)  Nolo contendere (with the permission of the court); or 
(4)  A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged. 
(b)  If the defendant refuses to enter a plea, the court shall enter a plea of not guilty and set the case down for trial. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-16. - Continuance of cases. 
The municipal judge may refuse to continue a case, except for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-17. - Appearance of complaining witnesses. 
A material or complaining witness in any contested prosecution shall appear at the session at which the prosecution is docketed. The prosecution may be dismissed if the material witness fails to appear. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-18. - Judgment and sentences. 
Upon a judgment or plea of guilty the court shall impose sentence. The court may: 
(1)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(2)  Commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(3)  Suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; 
(4)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future; or 
(5)  Impose such other form of judgment or sentence as the court deems appropriate, including but not limited to emotional maturity training, driver education, and to probate or suspend any of the foregoing sentences upon such conditions as the court shall deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-8. 
Sec. 9-19. - Enforcement of fines by levy and execution; payment in advance of court date. 
(a)  For fines that may be due by any defendant, execution may be issued by the city clerk and collected as tax executions are collected. 
(b)  Persons charged with traffic violations may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged; except that those persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and those charged with an offense in connection with an automobile collision shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-20. - Contempt of court. 
Failure to appear pursuant to any summons or subpoena, disrespectful conduct or failure to comply with any other order or judgment of the court shall constitute contempt of court and be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Sec. 9-21. - Court dates; contempt warrants; appeals. 
(a)  Court date will be made known to the defendant at the time of the arrest process and shall be properly indicated on the copy of charges given to the defendant by the arresting officer. 
(b)  Warrants for contempt of court charges may be issued following each session of court. 
(c)  Appeals may be taken from the municipal court in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 3, 6-29-82) 
Chapter 10 - FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Occupational license taxes, Ch. 14. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Fiscal year; budget year. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June. 
(b)  The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 11-12) 
Secs. 10-2—10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUDGET 

Sec. 10-20. - Nature and scope. 
(a)  The budget of the city shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing budget year. 
(b)  The budget shall set forth: 
(1)  All proposed expenditures for the administration, operation and maintenance of all offices, departments, boards, commissions and activities, including publicly owned and operated utilities and enterprises. 
(2)  The actual or estimated operating deficits from prior years. 
(3)  All interest and debt redemption charges during the budget year. 
(4)  Expenditures for capital projects to be undertaken or executed during the budget year, including expenditures for local improvements which may be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments. 
(5)  The anticipated income and other means of financing the proposed expenditures for the fiscal year. 
(Code 1965, § 11-13) 
Sec. 10-21. - Budget document. 
The budget document shall consist of three (3) parts, the nature and contents of which shall be as follows: 
(1)  Part I shall consist of a budget message prepared by the city manager which shall outline the fiscal policy of the city for the fiscal year, describing in connection therewith the important features of the budget plan; it shall also embrace a general budget summary setting forth the aggregate figures of the budget in such manner as to show the balanced relations between the total proposed expenditures and the total anticipated income and other means of financing the budget for the ensuing fiscal year, contrasted with the corresponding figures for the last completed fiscal year and the year in progress. The general budget summary shall be supported by explanatory schedules or statements, classifying the expenditures contained therein by organization units, sources and funds. 
(2)  Part II shall contain the detailed budget estimates both of expenditures and revenues as provided for in section 10-20. It shall also include statements of the bonded indebtedness of the city showing the debt redemption requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, the condition of any sinking funds, and the borrowing capacity; in addition thereto, it shall contain any statements relative to the financial plan which the city manager may deem desirable or which may be required by the governing body. 
(3)  Part III shall contain complete drafts of the budget ordinances; that is, the ordinances required to give legal sanction to the financial plan when adopted by the governing body. These ordinances shall include an appropriation ordinance, authorizing by spending agencies and funds, all expenditures of the city for budget year; and such other ordinances as may be required to provide the income necessary to finance the budget. 
(Code 1965, § 11-14) 
Sec. 10-22. - Preparation. 
At least sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, all departments, offices, boards and other spending agencies of the city shall prepare and submit to the city manager estimates of their expenditure requirements and their estimated revenues for the forthcoming budget year, compared with the corresponding figures of the last completed fiscal year and the estimated figures for the year in progress. The expenditure estimates shall be classified to set forth the data by funds, organizations, units, character, and objects of expenditure; the organization units may be subclassified by functions and activities at the discretion of the city manager. The revenue estimates shall be classified so as to show the receipts by funds, organization units and sources of income. 
(1)  The city manager shall review the estimates, altering, revising, increasing or decreasing the items of such estimates as such officer shall deem necessary in view of the needs of the various spending agencies and the probable income of the city. The city manager shall then prepare a budget in the form required by the provisions of section 10-21. 
(2)  The city manager shall transmit the budget to the governing body at least thirty (30) days before the beginning of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1965, § 11-15) 
Cross reference— Budget year, § 10-1. 
Sec. 10-23. - Hearing; publication of budget prior to hearing. 
(a)  Final action shall not be taken on the proposed budget until at least one public hearing has been held thereon after ten (10) days' notice thereof. 
(b)  The governing body shall arrange for and hold such hearing. 
(c)  The budget, when submitted by the city manager to the governing body, shall be published, advertised or otherwise made available for public inspection at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1965, § 11-16) 
Sec. 10-24. - Adoption of budget ordinance. 
At least one (1) week after the conclusion of the hearing required in section 10-23, the governing body shall consider the budget as submitted to it by the city manager and shall adopt a budget ordinance making appropriations in such sums as the governing authority may deem sufficient, whether greater or less than the sums presented in the proposed budget. The budget ordinance shall be adopted at a public meeting which shall be advertised at least one week prior to the meeting. 
(Code 1965, § 11-17; Ord. No. 718, § 1, 6-14-10) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 718, adopted June 14, 2010, changed the title of § 10-24 from "Adoption; publication of budget summary after adoption" to "Adoption of budget ordinance." 
Sec. 10-25. - Appropriations—Form. 
(a)  The appropriation ordinance, provided for in section 10-21, shall be drawn in such form as to authorize only lump sum appropriations to meet the expenditure needs of the various spending agencies of the municipal government. 
(b)  For the operation and maintenance expenses of each department, office, board or other spending agency, there shall be a single appropriation, which shall be allotted as provided in section 10-29 before becoming available for expenditure. 
(c)  Appropriations for the acquisition of property shall be in such detail under each spending agency as the city manager shall determine; provided, however, that such appropriations shall not be segregated into greater detail than the major classes, or projects, for which they are expendable. 
(Code 1965, § 11-18) 
Sec. 10-26. - Same—Effect of failure to make. 
If at the termination of any fiscal year, the appropriations necessary for the support of the municipal government of the city for the ensuing fiscal year shall not have been made, the several amounts appropriated in the last appropriation ordinance for the objects and purposes therein specified, so far as the same shall relate to the operation and maintenance expenses, shall be deemed to be reappropriated for the several objects and purposes specified in the last appropriation ordinance; and until the governing body shall act in such behalf, the treasurer shall make the payments necessary for the support of the municipal government on the basis of the appropriations of the preceding fiscal year. 
(Code 1965, § 11-19) 
Sec. 10-27. - Same—Additional. 
The governing body may, during a fiscal year, make additional appropriations or increase existing appropriations to meet emergencies. The funds therefor shall be provided from unappropriated revenues, if any, or from temporary loans. Such temporary loans shall be repaid at an annual rate equivalent to not less than two (2) mills upon the assessed valuation of real property within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 11-20) 
Sec. 10-28. - Same—Transfer. 
The governing body may authorize the transfer within the same fund of any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one spending agency under its jurisdiction to another. Such action shall be taken only on the recommendation of the city manager, and only during the last six (6) months of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1965, § 11-21) 
Sec. 10-29. - Allotments. 
(a)  Immediately before the beginning of the fiscal year, the city manager shall require the head of each spending agency to submit a work program for the budget year, which program shall include all appropriations for operation and maintenance expenditures and for the acquisition of property. Such work program shall show the requested allotments and appropriations for such spending agency by months for the entire year. 
(b)  The city manager shall review the requested allotments in the light of the work program of the spending agency concerned, and shall, if deemed necessary, revise, alter or change such allotments before approving them. 
(c)  The aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed the total appropriations available to the spending agency for the budget year. 
(d)  The city manager shall transmit copies of the approved allotments to the head of the spending agency concerned and to the city treasurer. 
(e)  The treasurer shall authorize all expenditures to be made from the appropriations on the basis of such allotments, and not otherwise. 
(f)  The head of any spending agency of the municipal government, whenever such head shall deem it necessary by reason of changed conditions, may revise the work program of such person's agency at the beginning of any month during the budget year and submit such revised program to the city manager with a request for a revision of the allotments for the remaining months of the budget year. If, upon a re-examination of the work program, the city manager shall grant the request for a revision of the allotments, the same procedure, so far as it relates to review, approval and control, shall be followed as in making the original allotments. 
(g)  In order to provide funds for possible emergencies arising during the budget year in the operation and maintenance expenditures of the various spending agencies of the municipal government, the city manager may require the head of each spending agency, in making the original allotments, to set aside at least five (5) per cent of the total amount appropriated as a reserve. At any time during the budget year, this reserve, or any portion of it, may be returned to the appropriation to which it belongs and be added to any one or more of the allotments, provided the city manager shall deem such action necessary, and shall notify the city treasurer of such action. Any unused portion thereof shall remain at the end of the budget period as an unexpended balance of appropriation. 
(Code 1965, § 11-22) 
Sec. 10-30. - When contracts and expenditures prohibited. 
(a)  No officer, employee or agent of the city shall expend or contract to be expended any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which, by its terms, involves the expenditure of money for any purposes for which provision is made in the appropriation ordinance in excess of the amounts appropriated in such ordinance for that fiscal year. 
(b)  Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this section shall be null and void as an obligation of the city, and no moneys belonging to the city shall be paid thereon; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the making of contracts for governmental services for a period exceeding one year, but any contract so made shall be executory only for the amounts agreed to be paid for such services to be rendered in succeeding fiscal years. 
(Code 1965, § 11-23) 
Chapter 11 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fireworks, OCGA, § 25-10-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - State safety rules and regulations—Adopted by reference. 
(a)  The rules and regulations promulgated for the prevention of destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in the state by the state safety fire commissioner, under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon the safety fire commissioners by the laws of the state, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  All rules and regulations of this city, and all rules and regulations heretofore adopted in conflict with the rules and regulations adopted by subsection (a) are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1965, § 12-19) 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules and regulations, OCGA, § 25-2-4. 
Sec. 11-2. - Same—Cooperation with state official for enforcement. 
The city fire marshal and all other city officials, department heads and employees shall co-operate with the state safety fire commissioner and state fire marshal and their deputies or assistants in the enforcement of the state safety fire law, and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto and adopted by section 11-1. 
(Code 1965, § 12-20) 
Sec. 11-3. - Gasoline trucks with trailers prohibited on certain streets. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any transport truck with a semi-trailer, or a transport truck with a trailer, hauling gasoline or kerosene on certain streets and avenues in the city as follows: 
(1)  Broad Street, from Third Avenue, North, to Third Avenue South. 
(2)  First Avenue, N.E., from Fifth Street, N.E., to North Broad Street. 
(Code 1965, § 12-1) 
Sec. 11-4. - Registration of burning. 
(a)  All citizens are required to advise the Cairo Fire Department of deliberate burns within the City of Cairo. 
(b)  No person shall burn trash, paper, or other rubbish within the city. Natural vegetation consisting of a six-foot by six-foot area or less may be burned after having first obtained the necessary permission from the Cairo Fire Department. Requests for permission to burn areas of natural vegetation greater than six-foot by six-foot shall be directed to the office of the city fire chief. 
(c)  Failure to register a burn that shall be deliberate shall result in punishment as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 669, § 1, 8-27-07; Ord. No. 684, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 10-14-13) 
Sec. 11-5. - Open burning—Permits and fees. 
(a)  Permits for open burning at or on development sites for the purpose of clearing land for new construction shall be obtained from the office of the city fire chief. 
(b)  The applicant shall complete an application for an open burning permit issued by the fire department. The applicant shall submit a plat or site plan showing the proposed location of the pit and information relating to the proximity of any occupied or unoccupied structure. 
(c)  No burning shall commence prior to an inspection of the site and the pit by a representative of the fire department. Upon approval of the pit, the permit shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days; the permit can be cancelled at anytime during this period due to weather. Permits may be extended for increments of fifteen-day periods, maximum of two (2) extensions. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 2, 10-14-13) 
Sec. 11-6. - Fires requiring written permits. 
(a)  The only type of fires permitted for the purpose of land clearing is pit fires. Nonpit fires are not permitted for land clearing within the city limits. All pit fires shall be conducted in strict accordance with the "Air Curtain Destructor Operating Guide and Procedures," as published by the Environmental Protection Division. 
(b)  Pit fires shall comply with the following stipulations: 
(1)  The pit shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from any occupied or habitable structure. This distance may be decreased upon determination by the fire department. 
(2)  Where a site cannot be excavated to the recommended depth due to high water table and/or subsurface rock, the pit may be constructed above ground level, subject to the same state standards and procedures for a pit below ground level. 
(3)  Only wood wastes consisting of trees, logs, large brush, stumps, leaves, and untreated lumber may be burned in the pit. 
(4)  Leaves, sawdust or other densely packed wood wastes, paper (any type), chemically treated, coated or impregnated wood, or nonwood construction materials shall not be burned. The amount of dirt/soil mixture shall be kept to a minimum. 
(5)  No more than one (1) air curtain destructor is allowed to be operated within a ten-acre permitted site at one (1) time. The air curtain destructor must be under the supervision of a trained operator at all times during operation. If there is a need for multiple burning pits, there shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet between each burning pit. 
(6)  Air curtain destructors shall be able to pass an even, nonturbulent flow of air across the top of the pit. Air curtain destructors with an air duct or manifold that has been altered by bends, dents, holes, etc., and are incapable of providing an even and nonturbulent flow of air across the top of the pit shall not be approved for use. 
(7)  The air curtain destructor shall be operated in a manner to prevent air, land or water pollution, safety/health hazards or nuisances. 
(8)  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic base or impregnated materials shall not be used to start or maintain air curtain destructor operations. 
(9)  When the pit is cleared of ash, airborne particulate is to be minimized by wetting or mixing the ashes with dirt. 
(10)  Diesel fuel or kerosene only may be used to start pit fires. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 3, 10-14-13) 
Sec. 11-7. - Burning restrictions. 
The following rules govern all burning within the city limits, whether or not a written permit is required: 
(1)  The fire chief's office may temporarily prohibit any and/or all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(2)  No burning of solid waste or household garbage is allowed. 
(3)  No burning of any materials that emit a heavy dark smoke, such as rubber products, oils, roofing material, petroleum based products, etc., is allowed. 
(4)  All fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until extinguished. 
(5)  There shall be a garden hose connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 4, 10-14-13) 
Sec. 11-8. - Summary abatement. 
The staff of the fire chief's office and personnel of the fire department shall have the authority to summarily abate any conditions which are in violation of any of the provisions of this article, and which may constitute an immediate threat to life and property. In no event shall a pit fire or other open burning continue after the fire chief's office has revoked the permit. 
(Ord. No. 749, § 5, 10-14-13) 
Secs. 11-9—11-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 11-20. - Fire Prevention and Safety Code adopted by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, subject to all amendments and conflicting provisions contained in the Code of Ordinances, those certain published codes known as the Fire Prevention Code for Buildings and NFPA Life Safety Code, editions most currently adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, one (1) copy of each being on file at the office of the building official which shall be the official copy of said code. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 11, 9-26-88; Ord. No. 440, § 20, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 749, § 6, 10-14-13) 
Editor's note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 334, adopted Sept. 26, 1988, added Art. XII, Fire Prevention, § 6-210, to Ch. 6. At the discretion of the editor, for purposes of classification, the provisions of said § 11 of Ord. No. 334 have been treated as superseding § 11-20 and have been codified as new § 11-20 herein. Former § 11-20 adopted the Fire Prevention Code, 1981 edition, by reference, and was derived from Code 1965, § 12-8; and Ord. No. 141, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 1969. 
Sec. 11-21. - Establishment of special districts. 
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code restricting storage of flammable liquids and explosives are hereby established as follows: First and second fire zones of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 12-10) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 6-4 of Ch. 6 of this Code. 
Sec. 11-22. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the building official or such official's designated agents. 
(Code 1965, § 12-11) 
Sec. 11-23. - Modifications. 
(a)  The building official may modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or such owner's or lessee's duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
(b)  The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the building official thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1965, § 12-12) 
Sec. 11-24. - Appeals. 
Whenever the building official or fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the building official or fire chief to the governing body within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed from. 
(Code 1965, § 12-13; Ord. No. 749, § 7, 10-14-13) 
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sanitary condition of livestock enclosure, § 5-7. 
State Law reference— Authority as to health generally, OCGA § 36-34-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 405, § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 1991, amended the Code by deleting former § 12-1, which pertained to littering with handbills on private or public property and derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 2.3-1, 2.3-2; redesignating former §§ 12-2—12-4 as §§ 12-5—12-7; and adding new §§ 12-1—12-4, as herein set forth. 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply within this chapter: 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin and aluminum cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, abandoned appliances, or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; residential or agricultural property, or wooded area. 
(Ord. No. 405, § 1, 8-12-91) 
Sec. 12-2. - Dumping, depositing, etc., litter on public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or cause to permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property within the city or waters within the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the city for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by proper city authorities to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and applicable state and federal regulation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place, throw down, deposit or leave any circular, dodger, advertising matter including political campaign material, or other written or printed commercial, business or mercantile information, either on paper or on other material used for advertising or information purposes, on any of the public areas, city property including but not limited to utility poles, traffic signs and signals, benches and trash containers, streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city, or on the lawn, yard or grounds of any private owner located in the city except with the permission of the owner or legal occupant thereof; provided however as to private property this section shall not apply to the normal and usual delivery of daily newspaper by the carrier thereof. These provisions shall also apply to any person who counsels or commands the violation of said subsection by the person who as principal actually and physically commits the violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 405, § 1, 8-12-91) 
Sec. 12-3. - Penalties for violation of litter ordinance. 
Any person who violates section 12-1 shall be punished as set forth in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Further, (1) in the sound discretion of the court in which conviction is obtained, a person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of the sentence, or (2) in the sound discretion of the judge of the court in which conviction is obtained a person may be directed to pick up or remove from any public park, private right-of-way or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of the sentence. 
(Ord. No. 405, § 1, 8-12-91) 
Sec. 12-4. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of section 12-1, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated section 12-1. 
(b)  Except as provided within this chapter, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter it is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of the person thereon in which manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated Section 12-1 herein. 
(Ord. No. 405, § 1, 8-12-91) 
Sec. 12-5. - Burning of trash. 
(a)  No person shall burn trash, paper, or other rubbish within the city. Natural vegetation consisting of a six-foot by six-foot area or less may be burned after having first obtained the necessary permission from the Cairo Fire Department. Requests for permission to burn areas of natural vegetation greater than six-foot by six-foot shall be directed to the office of the city fire chief. 
(b)  Such person who violates the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 14-1; Ord. No. 361, § 1, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 405, § 1, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 750, § 1, 10-14-13) 
State Law reference— Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-6. - Noise—General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessarily or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city. 
(Ord. No. 405, § 1, 8-12-91) 
Sec. 12-7. - Same—Specific prohibitions; exemptions. 
(a)  Prohibited noises: The following acts among others are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Code, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio or television set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast on the public streets for the purpose of advertising or for attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motor boat or any other motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(5)  Vehicles out of repair, etc. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, motorscooter, go-cart, or any other vehicle so out of repair, or so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise, including excessive noise coming through the exhaust thereof. 
(b)  Exemptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in the time of an emergency. 
(3)  Any other noise resulting from activities of temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the city in accordance with its ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 405, § 1, 8-12-91) 
Secs. 12-8—12-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSANITARY AND UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 673, adopted Jan. 28, 2007, enacted provisions designated as §§ 12-20—12-28, and have been treated as superseding §§ 12-20—12-32, which pertained to unfit buildings or structures, abandoned/junked vehicles, unsafe and unsanitary conditions and derived from Ord. No. 519, § 1, adopted July 26, 1999; Ord. No. 545, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2000; and Ord. No. 589, § 1, adopted April 28, 2003. 

Sec. 12-20. - Findings; policy. 
(a)  It is found that in the city there exist unsafe, unsanitary and unsightly conditions related to abandoned or junk vehicles, appliances, furniture, household goods and materials and unkept or unmowed areas. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to investigate and determine the existence of unsafe, unsanitary and unsightly conditions generally within the city so as to prevent conditions that are dangerous or injurious to the health of the citizens and deleterious to property values. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1, 1-28-07) 
Sec. 12-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned/junk motor vehicles means any vehicle designed to be self-propelled or towed for travel upon the ground including but not limited to automobiles, buses, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers or trailers that shall not have affixed thereto unexpired license plates or tags or is [are] currently registered with the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicles and is [are] in a wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition. 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Cairo, Georgia, or his designated agent. 
Nuisance or junk material means household appliances, construction material, trash, furniture, or furnishings of any nature that shall be in an unsafe or unsanitary condition. 
Nuisance vegetation means: 
(1)  Vegetation that obstructs the safe view of traffic at an intersection or driveway. 
(2)  Dead or dying trees or plants that may cause a hazard or damage a structure if they fall. 
(3)  Vegetation that consists of plants that regenerate annually being classified as weeds that exceed an average height of eighteen (18) inches that are the predominate cover [of] more than one-fourth (¼) of a lot or property located within two hundred (200) feet of a building used for residential, commercial, industrial purposes. 
Public official means any city employee who is in charge of any department of the city or the state relating to health, fire, streets, parks or building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures or health conditions in the city. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1, 1-28-07) 
Sec. 12-22. - Procedures relating to the removal of abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or nuisance vegetation. 
(a)  The city manager shall be designated as the public officer to exercise the powers as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Whenever a request is filed with the city manager by a public official or by at least three (3) residents of the city charging that there exists abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or nuisance vegetation on any private property within the city, or whenever it appears to the city manager (on his own motion) that abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or nuisance vegetation exist within the city, the city manager may, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any party having an interest in said property containing such material or condition, a notice stating that a hearing will be held before the city manager at a place within the city fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appeal in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the city manager. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing the city manager determines that the property under consideration does contain abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or nuisance vegetation, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any party having an interest in said property an order stating that within the time specified in the order, being not more than thirty (30) days, the abandoned/junk motor vehicles, or nuisance or junk material shall be removed or the nuisance vegetation shall be cut. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove the abandoned/junk motor vehicles, or nuisance or junk material or cut the nuisance vegetation, the city manager may cause such motor vehicle or nuisance or junk material to be removed or nuisance vegetation to be cut; provided, however, that this action shall not be exercised until the city council shall have approved by resolution the action to be taken. 
(e)  The amount of the cost of such removal of the material or cutting of the vegetation by the city manager shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of removal or cutting by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of such costs by the city manager in the office of the clerk of the City of Cairo on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. Such lien may be recorded on the lien docket of Grady County, Georgia, at the option of the clerk of the City of Cairo. If any item or material removed may be sold by the city manager, he shall sell same and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal and/or cleaning of the property and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the city treasury by the city manager, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such city clerk, and shall be disbursed by such clerk to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. 
(f)  The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal of abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or cutting of nuisance vegetation in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties at interest, shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city within thirty (30) days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the legal rate, in three (3) annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as described in this subsection. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2), the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal of the motor vehicles or other material or cutting of the nuisance vegetation in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358, as amended, and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1, 1-28-07) 
Sec. 12-23. - Powers of city manager in regard to abandoned/junk motor vehicles, or nuisance or junk material or cutting of nuisance vegetation. 
The following powers are given the city manager to carry out the duties to correct unsanitary conditions: 
(a)  To investigate the conditions in the city in order to determine which conditions relating the abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or nuisance vegetation are unsanitary, unsafe or detrimental to the community; 
(b)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(c)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(d)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(e)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
Sec. 12-24. - Service of complaints, citations or orders upon parties in interest and owners of abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or nuisance vegetation. 
(a)  Complaints, citations or orders issued by the city manager or public official pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest. The return of service signed by the city manager or public official or any affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or order was served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner and party in interest. 
(b)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or order to be served upon such party by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties, or such service may be made by any citizen or by registered or certified mail, return receipt provided. The return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or order at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by posting a copy of such complaint or order in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or order shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail, return receipt provided. 
(d)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardians or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the city or is a nonresident, he shall be served as provided for in paragraph (b) or (c) in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring [under] disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or if such minor or insane person lives outside the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence, which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person. In the case of other persons who live outside of the city or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and such whereabouts cannot be ascertained by the city manager in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the city manager shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such person shall be made in the same manner as provided in paragraph (c) or service may be perfected upon any person, firm or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)  A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county in which the dwelling, building or structure is located and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or order an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1, 1-28-07) 
Sec. 12-25. - Application to private property. 
All provisions of this article including method and procedure shall apply to private property of every type and nature where an accumulation of trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions or the existence of nuisance vegetation shall create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. 
Sec. 12-26. - Removal of junk or abandoned vehicles upon public property. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer of the city who finds a motor vehicle that has been left unattended on a public street or public property for a period of five (5) days shall be authorized to cause such motor vehicle to be removed to a garage or other place of safety, if the law enforcement officer reasonably believes that the person who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove the vehicle. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer of the city who finds a motor vehicle that has been abandoned or left unattended on a public street of the city shall be authorized to cause such motor vehicle to be removed immediately to a garage or other place of safety when such motor vehicle poses a threat to public health or safety or to mitigate traffic congestion. 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer of the city who causes such motor vehicle to be removed to a garage or other place of safety shall be liable for gross negligence only. 
(d)  Any law enforcement office of the city causing a motor vehicle to be removed shall attempt to determine within seventy-two (72) hours of the time of removal the name of the owner of the vehicle through inquiry to the department of motor vehicles if necessary. The name and address obtained of the last registered owner shall be made available to the person removing the vehicle and the name of such lienholder as may be listed as holding a security interest in the vehicle within three (3) calendar days of removal of the vehicle. If this information is not available, the law enforcement officer shall within three (3) calendar days notify the person removing or storing such vehicle of such fact. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1, 1-28-07) 
Sec. 12-27. - Removal of junk, appliances, and other personal property abandoned upon public property, penalty for permitting or falling to remove such property. 
No person or entity shall place or permit to remain any junk, litter, abandoned appliances, white goods or other personal property upon public property without the permission of the City of Cairo. Any law enforcement officer or employee of the city is hereby authorized to remove junk, litter, abandoned appliances, white goods, or personal property of any type located wholly or partially upon public property including the right-of-way of city streets as set forth herein. The city shall attempt to ascertain the owner of the junk, litter, abandoned appliances, white goods, or personal property that is found upon public property and commence with the immediate removal, or as scheduling permits, of the junk, litter, abandoned appliances, white goods, or personal property. The owner shall be required to pay to the city a charge for pickup according to a schedule adopted by mayor and council. 
If the owner cannot be determined following investigation, the city shall commence with the immediate removal, or as scheduling permits, of the junk, litter, abandoned appliances, white goods, or other personal property. Following removal, the city shall submit a notice of assessment to the person or entity that is reasonably believed to be the owner of the abandoned or junk property. The assessment will be in accordance with the established fee schedule shown above. Notice of assessment shall provide that the person receiving the notice shall have ten (10) days to controvert the assessment by submitting in writing to the city manager or his designee, the intent to controvert the assessment with the basis of the alleged property owner's denial of liability. Following the passage of ten (10) days from the mailing of the notice of assessment, an uncontroverted assessment shall be deemed valid. 
If controverted, the matter shall be heard by the city manager or his designee. A decision shall be made and communicated to the person controverting the assessment within ten (10) days. That decision may be appealed to the municipal court of the City of Cairo. Failure of the alleged owner of the abandoned property to controvert or pay the costs incurred shall permit the city of initiate legal action to collect the alleged sum owing through legal action as permitted by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1, 1-28-07) 
Sec. 12-28. - Procedure relating to the citation of those who permit the existence of unsanitary and unsightly conditions on private property. 
(a)  At such time as the city manager or public official shall determine that there exists abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or nuisance vegetation on any property within the city, or whenever it appears to the city manager or public official that abandoned/junk motor vehicles, nuisance or junk material or nuisance vegetation exist within the city, the city manager or public official may issue a citation to the offending party, said party to be determined from the property records of the City of Cairo. Such option to issue a citation shall be in addition to that procedure set forth within sections 12-22 to 12-27 to remove unsanitary and unsightly conditions. 
(b)  Such citation may, at the option of the issuing party, be in the form of a warning that shall request that the specified unsightly and/or unsanitary condition be corrected within fifteen (15) days. At the option of the city manager or public official, but in no event sooner than fifteen (15) days if a warning has been issued regarding the condition and no action taken by the owner, the citation shall specify that the owner is in violation of this article setting forth the condition that violates this article, set forth the proposed bond/fine for the offense as established by the municipal court and the owner shall be required to appear in municipal court at the date and time designated by the public official. If the citation is controverted by the property owner, the public official shall present the evidence of the violation to the court. The municipal court shall have authority by court rule to permit forfeiture of the bond/fine on the first citation issued for the condition. 
(c)  If the offending party is found guilty of violation of this article, the judge of municipal court of the City of Cairo shall punish the offender as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code of Ordinances or establish terms and conditions regarding correction of the unsafe, unsightly or unsanitary condition that are appropriate. 
(d)  The form of citation shall be approved by the city manager and judge of municipal court of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1, 1-28-07) 
Secs. 12-29—12-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 446, § 1, adopted June 12, 1995, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as set out in §§ 12-60—12-65. Prior to amendment, such article pertained to the same subject matter and was derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 16-23, 16-29—16-33, 16-36; and Ord. No. 229, adopted Dec. 13, 1976. 

Sec. 12-60. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings indicated: 
Nuisance: A condition dangerous to human life or detrimental to health that arises because a building, structure, or premises is not sufficiently ventilated, sewered, drained, cleaned or lighted so that in reference to its intended or actual use, the air, food, drink or water supply is unwholesome. 
Prohibited discharge: Discharge or spillage of sewage permitting seepage or discharge of effluent upon the ground surface, to a water course, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, water well, abandoned well, lake, stream, river, estuary, ground water or other body of water. 
Septic tank: An approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building or residential, commercial or industrial site and from which the effluent does not come to the surface of the ground but which is treated or processed before discharging the effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Sewage: Any liquid waste including human excreta, liquid household waste from residences, or from commercial and industrial establishments. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-61. - Sanitary method required. 
(a)  Every residence and building in which human beings reside, are employed or congregate, shall have a sanitary method of sewage disposal connected to the city sanitary sewer system, where a sewer connection is available. If a sanitary sewer connection is not available, a septic tank shall be provided of a type approved by the state department of public health. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of any sewage within the city except through a drainage pipe connected with a city sanitary sewer system if such connection is available or in any case that a sewer connection is not available then a septic tank of a type approved by the state department of health. 
(c)  No person or entity shall cause or permit a prohibited discharge or nuisance to exist as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-62. - Sanitary facilities on leased premises. 
No person owning or leasing any premises in the city shall permit a prohibited discharge or permit disposal of sewage on property leased or rented by such person or such persons' agent except in a sanitary manner through a system connected with the city sanitary sewer system where sewage connection is available, or where sewage connection is not available in a septic tank of a type approved by the state department of health. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-63. - Construction of septic tank. 
No septic tank other than a type approved by the state department of public health shall be constructed or maintained within the city. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-64. - Privy. 
No person shall construct or maintain a privy or dry closet within the city except for temporary use on a construction site. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 12-65. - Connection to sanitary sewer system. 
Every residence and other building in which human beings reside, are employed or congregate, shall have a sanitary water closet and all sewage resulting from the use of the residence or building shall be disposed of through the city sanitary sewer within twelve (12) months from the date that a sewer connection is available. The failure or refusal of any owner of such residence or building to connect to the sanitary sewer system within twelve (12) months from the date such connection is available shall be a violation of this Code and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each thirty-day period such sewer connection is not connected shall be a new offense. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 6-12-95) 
Secs. 12-66—12-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 513, adopted 12-14-98, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as set out in §§ 12-70—12-85. Prior to such amendment, art. IV, §§ 12-70—12-74, pertained to the same subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 370, § 1, adopted Apr. 9. 1990. 

Sec. 12-70. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
Alarm agent means any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to or causing others to respond to an alarm device. 
Alarm business means any business operated by a person for a profit which engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or responding to a burglar or robbery alarm system or which causes any of these activities to take place. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment and devices designed to signal the presence of a potential hazard relayed by an alarm answering service or any other audible or silent alarm device to which the police are expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic robbery alarm systems," "burglar alarm systems," "robbery alarm systems," "manual robbery alarm systems" and "intrusion alarms" as those terms are hereinafter defined. Fire alarm systems and alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted burglary or robbery at a premises are specifically excluded from the provisions of this article. 
Alarm user means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or proprietary systems. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises (other than a proprietary system), the person using such system is an alarm user. Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this article are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located, of an attempted burglary, unauthorized intrusion or robbery attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of "alarm system" and shall be subject to this article. 
Automatic dialing system means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by electronic or optical impulse, radio waves or by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice, text or data message to 911 indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Burglary alarm system means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into an area protected by the system. 
Chief of police shall mean the City of Cairo Chief of Police or his/her designee. 
City means the City of Cairo. 
Commercial alarm means an alarm installed on premises which is primarily used for one or more of the following: 
(a)  Business providing sales, service or both; 
(b)  Public agency or nonprofit entity or organization providing service to the general public or a significant segment thereof. 
Commercial alarm does not include any alarm installed on premises primarily used for residential purposes. 
Emergency alarm system means any devise which is designed to alert, either directly or indirectly, personnel of the police department to any emergency situation. 
False alarm means a non-emergency activation of an alarm system due to mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance or the negligence of the owner, lessee or his/her employees or agents which results in a response by the city police department. 
False alarm does not include alarm activations caused by tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent, uncontrollable, acts of nature. 
Interconnect means to connect an alarm system to a voice, text or data line, either directly or through any device that utilizes hard wire or radio transmissions, for the purpose of transmitting emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system. Interconnect includes connection to radio transmitters and other text and data carrying or transmission devices. 
Intrusion alarm system means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Local alarm system means an audible or visual alarm system that can be heard or seen from the exterior of a structure within which the system is installed. 
Manual robbery alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer of the attack. 
One-year period means the period of time commencing upon the occurrence of an initial false alarm, and terminating one (1) year following the initial false alarm. 
Police chief means the chief of police of the Cairo Police Department or his/her designated representative. 
Police or police department means the City of Cairo Police Department. 
Premises means any privately owned real property or structures located within the city (excluding land or structures owned, occupied by, rented or leased to the federal, state, or local government entities). 
Proprietor alarm means an alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business. 
Proprietary system means an alarm system sounding and/or recording alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the protected premises, and under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises. If a proprietary system includes a signal line connected directly or by means of an automatic dialing device to a police communications center, a central station, modified central station or answering service, it thereby becomes an "alarm system" as defined herein. 
Remote signaling system means an alarm signaling system which, when activated by an alarm device, transmits a signal from an alarm signaling device to a central location, other than the communications center, where appropriate action is taken to investigate and respond to the signal. 
Responsible party means any person, or their agent, representative or designee who owns, leases, or is lawfully in charge of the premises on which an alarm system is installed or maintained, or who owns, leases, or uses an alarm system on premises located within the city. 
Revocation of permit means an order by the chief of police revoking an alarm system permit and forbidding use of an alarm system until proof of correction is provided following two (2) or more suspensions of an alarm permit over a twelve-month period. 
Robbery alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery, attempted robbery, or the commission of a crime involving potential death or serious injury at a specific particular location. 
Service charge means the amount prescribed by the mayor and council which represents the costs incurred by the city in providing extraordinary alarm system service as described in section 12-72. 
Shall is always mandatory and not directory. 
Suspension of permit means: 
(a)  An action taken by the chief of police to suspend an alarm system permit following demand for proof of correction of the alarm system; or 
(b)  An alarm management procedure to assure correction of the cause(s) of false alarms from a permitted alarm system. 
Subscriber means a person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm device. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-71. - Alarm business and agent responsibilities. 
(a)  No person shall maintain an alarm business in the city without having first obtained a business license from the city and satisfying all alarm business registration requirements of the State of Georgia and registration of the name shown on the state issued identification card with the chief of police. Any person acting as an alarm agent or responding alarm agent shall carry the registration card issued by the State of Georgia while engaged in alarm agent activities and shall display such registration card to a representative of the police department upon request. 
(b)  Any person or business who leases, maintains, sells, or installs any alarm system or who causes such systems to be leased, maintained, sold or installed shall inform any and all responsible persons about: the operational, remedy and penalty provisions contained within this article; the false alarm suspension provisions contained within this article. 
(1)  Automatic dial telephone devices are prohibited and the police department will not respond to signals from such devices. 
(2)  The chief of police may suspend a permittee whose alarm system has experienced three (3) false alarms in a ninety-day period or more than six (6) false alarm response within a twelve-month period which did not require police services for any purpose other than the deactivation of the alarm. 
(3)  No person shall operate or use an alarm system which causes a request for service to be placed with the police department prior to the verification of the need for such service by either physical inspection of the scene of activation, remote electronic inspection of the scene, or an attempt to verify the need for service by telephonic means. 
(4)  The operational requirements, the remedies and penalty provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-72. - Alarm system permit; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm permit as required by this article. 
(b)  In the event a residential alarm user is assessed a civil penalty as provided in section 12-83 for failure to have a permit as required by this article, the permit fee shall be satisfied from the civil penalty amount paid by the residential alarm user. The permit for the alarm shall be issued to the residential alarm user upon the alarm user's submission of a completed application permit form. 
(c)  No alarm permit shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Persons engaged solely in the manufacture repair or sale of alarm systems or components from a fixed location who do not personally or through an agent install, maintain, service, inspect or plan the alarm system for any location. 
(2)  Alarm systems which do not directly alert law enforcement agencies or others outside the protected buildings, structure or facility, but are designed solely to alert security personnel or others directly connected with or employed by the owner or operator of the protected building, structure or facility. 
(3)  Municipal, county, state or federal government agencies. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-73. - Obtaining and filing of permits; required information. 
(a)  Permits required by this article shall be obtained from and filed with the city hall which shall prescribe the permit form. Permits for alarm systems installed by an alarm company may be issued by an agent of the company using the prescribed form and forwarding a copy to the city hall with payment of required fees. 
(b)  The permit must contain the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of three (3) persons who will render service and repairs to a malfunctioning alarm system and authorize access to the interior and exterior of the premises for a security check at any time of the day or night. 
(c)  Alarm companies, when servicing or repairing pre-existing alarms which have not been issued a permit, shall issue the responsible party an alarm permit as provided for in subsection (a), or provide the responsible party with an application form for an alarm permit and advise the responsible party of the requirements of this ordinance as per section 12-72. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-74. - Alarm permit duration and transfer. 
An alarm permit may be issued at any time, but all alarm permits expire on the last day of the 24th month following issuance of the permit. Alarm permits shall not be transferable from one person to another, from one location to another, and such permits may not be transferred with the land or structure. Any such transfer shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-75. - Fees. 
The mayor and council establish the following fee schedule related to this article: 
(a)  Application fee for all permits required by this article is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  Service fee responses to false alarms pursuant to section 12-71 is twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(c)  Inspection fee of alarm systems following suspension or revocation of a permit is twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-76. - Permit to be kept on alarm system premises; posting of permit. 
(a)  The permits issued pursuant to this article shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is located. The police department may issue an appropriate identification tag and establish requirements for its posting. 
(b)  No person shall use an alarm system without posting the alarm system permit number at the front entrance of the premises served by the alarm system. 
Street address numbers shall be clearly visible and readable from the exterior of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-77. - Alarm requirements. 
(a)  No audible alarm shall be installed, maintained or activated which emits the sound of a siren similar to those utilized on emergency vehicles or for air raid, disaster or other emergency warnings. 
(b)  Audible alarm systems which can be heard outside the building, structure or facility of the alarm user shall be equipped with a sound emission cutoff feature, which will stop the emission of sound fifteen (15) minutes or less after the alarm is activated. Alarm systems without properly functioning sound emission cutoff features will be designated as a nuisance and be subject to abatement by the police department. 
(c)  The responsible party shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of all persons to be notified to render repairs or services during any time that the audible alarm sounds. 
(d)  Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in such a position as to be easily readable in size, form and style from the ground level adjacent to the building. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-78. - Duty to deactivate alarm after notice; duty to respond and provide police access to premises; penalty for failure to respond. 
(a)  The responsible party shall deactivate any alarm within thirty (30) minutes after police department notification to the responsible party that such alarm is activated and is sounding. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the responsible party to cause, permit, suffer or allow such system to sound for a period in excess of thirty (30) minutes after notification or efforts of notification have been made. 
(c)  The responsible party shall proceed to the premises within thirty (30) minutes after notice or efforts of notification and render any assistance necessary service, including, but is not limited to, providing access to the property for a search by the police department. Failure of the responsible party to respond to the premises may result in a citation. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-79. - Suspension and revocation of permit; grounds. 
(a)  The chief of police may suspend any permittee whose alarm system has experienced three (3) false alarms in a ninety-day period or six (6) false alarms within a twelve-month period. 
(b)  Failure of the police department to locate any evidence of intrusion or other need or cause for activating an alarm system shall result in the presumption of a false alarm. If within ten (10) days of notification the chief of police receives from the permittee satisfactory evidence that the alarm was valid because it was excusable or was an alarm caused by an unauthorized entry, attempted unauthorized entry, or other unlawful activity on the alarm site, the permittee's record will be amended to indicate a valid or excusable alarm. 
(c)  The chief of police shall notify the permittee in writing that the alarm system permit has been suspended. The permittee may submit the proper fees for a reissued permit and satisfactory written evidence indicating that the cause of the false alarm has been determined and corrected. 
(d)  More than two (2) suspensions in any year shall be the basis for revocation of the permit and police department non response to the alarm. Petition may be made to reinstate the alarm permit and response to alarms upon compliance with the requirements in the police chief's letter of alarm permit revocation. 
(e)  Any alarm user whose alarm permit has been suspended or revoked shall immediately discontinue use of their alarm system until such time as the suspension is rescinded or the alarm permit is reissued. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly activate an alarm system after the permit has been suspended or revoked. Unlawful activation of an alarm system will result in the issuance of a citation. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-80. - Suspension or revocation appeals. 
The decision of the chief of police to suspend or revoke a permit may be appealed to the chief of police, in writing, within ten (10) days of written notice. A hearing will then be scheduled to be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager concerning the issues raised in the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-81. - Inspection of alarm devices and businesses. 
(a)  For the purposes of enforcing this article, the police chief shall have the authority at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any commercial premises in the city in or upon which alarm systems or alarm businesses subject to this article are located, to inspect the installation and/or operation of such alarm systems or alarm businesses. If such entry is refused, the police chief shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  For the purposes of enforcing this article, the police chief shall have authority to inspect residential dwellings which have alarm systems after he has given written notice to the owner of such residence that he wishes to inspect the alarm system. If such entry is refused, the police chief shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. The written notice shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the inspection. 
(c)  If such inspection reveals any violation of the provisions of this article, a written report detailing such violation shall be promptly sent to the owner, lessee or other person responsible for the violation. Such report shall require the correction within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice of violation. The alarm user or alarm business shall be granted a reasonable extension of time to correct such violation upon good cause shown. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully reveal any business information obtained during said inspection other than for official police business or for the administration of this article and law enforcement purposes. 
(e)  The amount of the service charge shall be set by the mayor and council in the published fee schedule based upon the city cost of the service provided. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-82. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall operate or use a robbery alarm system for any other purpose other than reporting robberies or other crimes involving potential serious bodily injury or death. 
(b)  No person shall operate or use a burglary alarm system for any purpose other than detecting and reporting an unauthorized entry or an attempted unauthorized entry upon the premises protected by such system. 
(c)  No person shall operate or use an alarm system that causes more than two (2) requests for services in any continuous twelve-month period without prior verification of the need for the service. "Verification of need for the service" means an effort to ascertain the existence of an unauthorized entry justifying a police service response. Verification may be accomplished by physical inspection of the alarm location, remote electronic inspection, or telephonic verification. 
(d)  No person shall install or operate any alarm system using automatic dial telephone devices as described in section 12-70. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-83. - Violation penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the issuance of a citation and imposition of civil penalties as established by the mayor and council. Responsible parties shall be subject to being billed for services for responses to excessive false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-84. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 12-72 of this article regarding residential alarm users, the citation of any person for violation of the provisions of this article or for failing to secure a permit as required by this article shall not relieve the person from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the time of the citation nor shall payment of any permit fee prevent issuance and prosecution of civil penalties for any violation of this article including fees for service for false alarm responses by the police department. 
(b)  All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one (1) or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the violation of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The amount of any permit fee, alarm response fee, application fee, inspection fee or other service fee is a debt to the City of Cairo. All such fees and charges shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days after they are due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 12-85. - Confidentiality. 
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this article shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 513, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 12-86—12-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, OR STRUCTURES OF NEGATIVE CONDITION 

Sec. 12-100. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the City of Cairo, Georgia, find and declare that within the city limits of the City of Cairo there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures that are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the City of Cairo; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the City of Cairo where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures that are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 11-28-07) 
Sec. 12-101. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling Act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 675, § 1, 11-28-07) 
Sec. 12-102. - Definitions. 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life codes as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those buildings or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the O.C.G.A., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term 'dwellings, buildings, or structures' shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Cairo. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having a record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building or structure. 
Public authority means city manager and City of Cairo building official, or any person who may be designated by the city manager. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8, and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8, and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 675, § 1, 11-28-07) 
Sec. 12-103. - Duties of owners: Appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on a property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
(b)  The mayor and council of the City of Cairo shall appoint or designate city manager or designees to exercise the powers prescribed by this article; 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least three (3) residents of the City of Cairo charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the City where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41 of the O.C.G.A. qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful. 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city clerk, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred: 
(1)  The lien provided for in paragraph (3) of this subsection shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Grady County and shall be related back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Grady County and enter such lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem tax, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. Thirty (30) days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The city clerk shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of the City of Cairo. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the city to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(3)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(4)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(5)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(6)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 675, § 1, 11-28-07) 
Sec. 12-104. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of the neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 675, § 1, 11-28-07) 
Sec. 12-105. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 675, § 1, 11-28-07) 
Sec. 12-106. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three (3) business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one (1) of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement office of the city; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the country, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, and incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and such guardian or personal representative resides outside the country or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (f) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have rights in the property or interest in the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of the protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this article, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (3) of this article, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 675, § 1, 11-28-07) 
Chapter 13 - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Installation of pipes, etc., on streets, § 18-1; energy load management program, § 15-16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Application for service; deposit as fixed. 
The consumer shall make application for water, gas, electricity, or sewer service at the utility department office of the city and at the same time make a cash security deposit as may be fixed from time to time by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 220, § 2, 4-28-75) 
Sec. 13-2. - Charges for and regulation of tapping of service. 
(a)  Each consumer subscribing to use the water, gas, electricity or sewer service of the city shall pay a connection fee as prescribed from time to time by the governing body. Such deposit shall cover the cost of extension of line to the nearest property line, with a maximum distance, however, of fifty (50) feet, beyond which the property owner shall pay such amount per foot as established from time to time by the governing body. Such owner shall further comply with all requirements of the state when the work is on state roads. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three (3) feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse water service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or back-flow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(f)  There will be an additional charge per square yard for the replacement of any paving necessary to install the connection, as fixed from time to time by the governing body. 
(Code 1965, § 25-53(3), (4); Ord. No. 220, §§ 3, 5, 4-28-75) 
Cross reference— Sewer connections, § 6-140 et seq. 
Sec. 13-3. - Turning on utility. 
(a)  The city hereby reserves to itself the sole right to turn on gas, electricity, water and other utility service of the city, in any new building that is being piped or wired. 
(b)  The gas fitter, plumber and electrician, respectively, may turn on gas, water and electricity for test purposes and make necessary adjustments, but the same shall be turned off when completed. 
(c)  Where the utility is already on and serving a customer, the installer replacing any appliance may leave the utility on after work is completed. The gas fitter shall be responsible for lighting all pilot lights which went out while the gas was cut off at the meter. 
(Code 1965, § 15-96) 
Sec. 13-4. - Service rates and conditions as fixed. 
The governing body shall be vested with and hereby reserves the right from time to time as it may deem expedient, to fix the rates and rate conditions applicable to all residential and commercial customers desiring natural gas, water, electricity and sewer service and solid waste collection and disposal, by proper motion or resolution entered on its minutes. 
(Code 1965, §§ 15-117, 27-9, 32-1, 32-2; Ord. No. 161, § 1, 7-13-70; Ord. No. 220, § 1, 4-28-75) 
Sec. 13-5. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water, gas and electricity furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of the consumer's household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water, gas or electricity to any other person or permit any other person to use such water, gas or electricity. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and discontinuance of utility service. 
(b)  Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by such consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping, wiring and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of city water covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of city water they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Ord. No. 220, § 5, 4-28-75) 
Sec. 13-6. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the utility consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping and wires, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the utility system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the service lines. 
(Ord. No. 220, § 7, 4-28-75) 
Sec. 13-7. - Change of occupancy. 
Notice must be given at the city utility department office to discontinue utility service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for the cost of all service received up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for service within forty-eight (48) hours after occupying the premises; failure to do so will make such occupant liable for paying for the service received since the last meter reading, or the date covered by the last payment if no meter. 
(Ord. No. 220, § 8, 4-28-75) 
Sec. 13-8. - Meter reading; billing collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for utility service shall be mailed out on such days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city utility office. A failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent, nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within ten (10) days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten (10) per cent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment within twenty (20) days from the date due will result in the service being shut off from the user's property. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the governing body is made, and a service charge as required by the governing body paid for each meter or premises reconnected. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10-75—10-77, 27-10, 27-11; ord. No. 220, § 9, 4-28-75) 
Sec. 13-9. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Ord. No. 220, § 10, 4-28-75) 
Sec. 13-10. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes the bill to be in error, such consumer shall present a claim, in person, at the city utility office before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice the claim. 
(b)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of the previous bills and from other proper data. 
(Ord. No. 220, § 11, 4-28-75) 
Sec. 13-11. - No service installed without meter. 
No water, gas or electricity service shall be installed by the city without a meter. 
(Code 1965, § 32-3) 
Sec. 13-12. - Sewer service fees where consumer has private water supply. 
Where a user has a private water supply, if the sewage disposal fees are not paid in accordance with the provisions of this article, the city may disconnect and cut off all utility service, and the owner or user shall not reconnect such person's own private water supply until the sewage disposal fees shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1965, § 27-12) 
Sec. 13-13. - Unauthorized use of, diversion of, or tampering with city utility distribution system and obstruction of city utility department personnel. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally and without authority from the city do such act or cause such act so as to permit to occur any of the following: 
(1)  The unauthorized use of city utilities without the consent of the city of any service sold or distributed by the city. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person receiving the benefit of such service without proper charge as result of any improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of diversion or unauthorized use of city utilities. 
(2)  The diversion of any utility service by preventing the proper measure of service provided by the city measuring or metering device. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person who receives the benefit of the diversion shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of diversion. 
(3)  The tampering with property of the city which includes the act or attempted act of injuring or destroying any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to the city. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person having possession of the property on which the tampering occurs or who benefits from the act of tampering shall be presumed to be responsible for the tampering. 
(b)  No person shall obstruct or in any way attempt to prevent the city from the operation of providing electric, gas, water, or sewerage service and the employees of the city in performing the assigned duties including the unscheduled maintenance of city utilities during emergency or other routine acts including meter reading, inspection and the performance of repairs. City employees shall have the right to go upon private property to perform inspections, maintenance and other necessary services regarding city utilities. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 and at the discretion of the court may be required to pay all costs related to necessary repairs, costs of investigation, and cost of utility service diverted by or used by the customer that was not reported and may be reasonably proven by the city. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 8-26-91; Ord. No. 564, § 1, 9-10-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 408, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 1991, amended the Code by deleting former § 13-13, which pertained to unauthorized use of or tampering with the city utility system and derived from Ord. No. 330, § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 1988, and adding a new § 13-13 as herein set forth. 
Secs. 13-14—13-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF SEWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Charges as prescribed, § 13-4. 

Sec. 13-20. - Work permits for street cut. 
No person shall make any cut or trench in any highway, street, reservation or public space in the city, or disturb or remove any public work or materials therein, or turn, lift, remove, raise or tamper with any cover of any manhole, basin, inlet or other appurtenance of any public sewer without a permit from the plumbing inspector. The permit shall be kept on the work site and exhibited to any person authorized to examine it. 
(Code 1965, § 27-2) 
Cross reference— Scope of work under plumbing permit, § 6-140. 
Sec. 13-21. - Certain substances prohibited in sewers. 
No acids, strong alkali or deteriorating salts or anything detrimental to the system, shall be introduced into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1965, § 27-3) 
Sec. 13-22. - Analyzing of industrial waste. 
(a)  Before any industrial waste may be disposed of in the city's sanitary sewer, such waste shall be analyzed by the state board of health for deteriorating effect on the disposal plant. 
(b)  Each industrial plant shall file with the city engineer a written statement from the state board of health that the final waste from such industrial plant will have no deteriorating effect on the disposal plant, or retard its operation in any way. 
(Code 1965, § 27-19) 
Sec. 13-23. - Treatment of industrial waste. 
(a)  Should any industrial waste require treatment so as to meet the standards set by the state board of health for sewerage plant treatment, such waste shall be treated by the industry at its expense and at its own plant. 
(b)  If such waste can be treated more economically by the city at the disposal plant, the industry, by agreement with the city, may have the city treat its waste with all cost of treatment and equipment paid for by the industry. 
(c)  If no satisfactory treatment can be made of an industry's waste, such an industry shall treat and dispose of its own waste in such manner as is approved by the state board of health and the city engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 27-20) 
Sec. 13-24. - Annual certification as to change in character of industrial waste. 
All industries that are connected with the sanitary sewer that have industrial waste shall furnish the city engineer with a written statement during each year, from the state board of health, showing that there has been no major change in the industrial waste during the preceding twelve (12) months. Any change in an industry's waste shall be treated by the industry at its own expense, as provided in section 13-23. 
(Code 1965, § 27-21) 
Sec. 13-25. - Plants always subject to inspection. 
Every industrial plant shall be subject to inspection by the state board of health or city engineer at any time. 
(Code 1965, § 27-27) 
Sec. 13-26. - Surface water drains connected with sewer. 
No drain that carries off rain or surface water shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1965, § 27-22) 
Sec. 13-27. - Connecting private sewers and drains to city sewer. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any private sewer or drain into any sewer or drain owned by the city without the consent of the city manager. 
(b)  Such connection shall only be made under the direction and supervision of the building official. 
(Code 1965, § 27-1) 
Sec. 13-28. - Interconnection of sewers before reaching city system. 
(a)  No sanitary, storm or industrial sewer shall be connected together before reaching the city's trunk sewerage line. 
(b)  Where industries have more than one type of waste, each shall have a separate connection to the city's trunk line. 
(Code 1965, § 27-26) 
Sec. 13-29. - Settling basins; screens; traps. 
(a)  Industrial sewers shall be run into a settling basin to allow for at least three (3) hours' detention and screened within wire of not more than quarter-inch mesh, and trapped, before entering into city sewer. 
(b)  The trap shall be so constructed that nothing can enter the sewer that would not pass through the screen. 
(c)  The trap shall be covered at all times, except while cleaning, by a reinforced concrete or metal door. 
(d)  Settling basins shall be so constructed as to stop the flow of water through them while being cleaned, or a duplicate basin may be constructed to allow for cleaning without causing an interruption of the flow of sewage. 
(Code 1965, § 27-23) 
Sec. 13-30. - Removing and replacing screens. 
No screen shall be removed or replaced except under the supervision of the building official. 
(Code 1965, § 27-24) 
Sec. 13-31. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and other petroleum products and sand/soil interceptors shall be provided when following the application of reasonable detection practices; the city manager in consultation with the director of utilities shall determine that sound engineering practice requires an interceptor for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, any amount of flammable wastes, sand, soil or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager in accordance with the standard plumbing code and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously by the owner at the owner's expense so as to permit satisfactory and efficient operation. 
(b)  All establishments involved with food preparation established after February 12, 1990, shall provide a grease interceptor of appropriate capacity between the grease source inlet and the sewer tap. The sewer line from rest rooms or other sanitary facilities shall not be tied to the grease interceptor. Grease interceptors shall be installed with an access manhole brought up to or slightly above grade for easy cleaning. Where unusual conditions make the provisions of this paragraph prohibitive, an alternate system to prevent entry of grease into the sewer system may be approved by the city manager provided it removes grease to a level below one hundred (100) milligrams per liter. All such other establishments that have the possibility of disposing of grease, oil or other petroleum products, sand/soil into the city sewerage system may be required to install an interceptor under the same terms and conditions as set forth hereinabove. 
(c)  All existing establishments presently operating without a grease interceptor shall be required to install an interceptor whenever alternate methods of disposal of grease, oil, sand or other ingredients shall fail and it is deemed necessary by the city manager in consultation with the director of utilities following reasonable detection practices to prevent grease, oil or sand from entering the city's sewer system. 
(d)  Interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers, which when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight wherever desirable. 
(e)  When installed, the interceptor shall be pumped and cleaned at least every six (6) months or more frequently if deemed necessary by the city manager. An inspection of existing conditions may be made by authorized city personnel at any time that a problem shall occur. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 2-12-90) 
Secs. 13-32—13-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 347, §§ 1—23, adopted Jan. 23, 1989, has been treated by the editor as superseding §§ 13-40—13-46 of Art. III, and has been codified as a new Art. III, §§ 13-40—13-62. Said former Art. III pertained to solid waste disposal and was derived from Code 1965, § 14-4; Ord. No. 167, §§ 1—6, adopted Jan. 26, 1971; and Ord. No. 237, adopted August 8, 1977. 
Cross reference— Burning of trash within business districts, § 12-2; nuisances, § 12-20 et seq. 

Sec. 13-40. - Purpose. 
The mayor and council of the City of Cairo, Georgia, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the municipality; to avoid unnecessary scattering of trash and garbage prior to collection of said waste materials, hereby ordains and enacts into law an official municipal garbage collection ordinance for the incorporated area of the City of Cairo, for trash, garbage, and waste materials collection purposes, and agreed upon through laws enacted by both the mayor and council of the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-41. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Municipal Garbage Collection Ordinance for the City of Cairo, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 347, § 2, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-42. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicated otherwise. 
(a)  Garbage: Includes all waste accumulations of animals, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables; tin cans or other containers originally used for foodstuffs. 
(b)  Rubbish: Includes all nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, glass, crockery, excelsior, cloth and similar materials. 
(c)  Refuse: Includes garbage and rubbish and any other solid wastes. 
(d)  Garbage can: Means a watertight receptacle or container of substantial metal or plastic construction, having a capacity of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) gallons, with a tight-fitting lid or cover, with not less than one handle on the lid or cover, and two (2) handles on the receptacle or container by which same may be conveniently lifted or moved. 
(e)  Fenced trash bin: Means a trash containment area which is a minimum height of six (6) feet and constructed of chain-link or wooden fencing which will prevent small paper trash or styrofoam packing material from blowing out of the area. The area will have one gate opening at least forty-eight (48) inches in width. Such a trash bin which is in the direct view of the general public and customers of adjoining businesses shall be constructed in a manner to prevent the viewing of the contents of said container. If the trash bin is located behind the business and not next to a customer entrance of entrance of adjoining businesses, the contents may be open to view. 
(f)  Trash bags: Are defined as any dark-colored plastic bag containers that are of a suitable quality to remain intact when lifted and have a capacity of not more than thirty (30) gallons. 
(g)  Sanitation department: Means the municipal sanitation department of the City of Cairo. 
(h)  City landfill: Means a place for dumping or disposing of refuse, operated by the City of Cairo. For further definition see section 13-70(f). 
(i)  Commercial container: Means a container provided by the city to commercial or industrial customers. Customers are billed according to the size of the container and the number of pickups provided per week. 
(j)  Premises: Means any dwelling, flat, roominghouse, apartment house, hospital, school, hotel, club, restaurant, boardinghouse, eating place, shop, place of business, manufacturing establishment, courthouse, jail, city hall, post office, or other public building. 
(k)  Persons: Means any individual firm or corporation. 
(l)  White goods: Refrigerator, stoves or similar appliances with exterior dimensions greater than eighteen (18) inches by eighteen (18) inches by twelve (12) inches, scrap industrial equipment, piping or any other scrap metal or similar item. 
(m)  Yard waste: Includes yard clippings, shrub trimmings, leaves, pine straw and similar materials. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 3, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 470, § 1, 9-9-96; Ord. No. 498, § 1, 1-12-98; Ord. No. 590, § 1, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 13-43. - Storage of garbage. 
It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any premises where garbage is created or accumulates, at all times to keep or cause to be kept a sufficient number of garbage cans or garbage bags for the deposit therein of said garbage and to deposit or cause to be deposited the same therein, and the lids or covers of such garbage cans shall be kept tightly closed thereon at all times other than when garbage is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 4, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-44. - Storage of rubbish. 
It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any premises where rubbish or other nonputrescent waste is created or accumulates, at all times to keep or cause to be kept a sufficient number of garbage cans or other containers for deposit therein or refuse to prevent the spreading or scattering of such refuse upon said premises. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 5, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-45. - Enforcement on private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge or control of any premises to keep, cause to be kept, or allow the keeping on any premises within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo garbage, rubbish, or other refuse in such manner that it will become offensive or deleterious to health or likely to cause disease and the same is hereby declared a public nuisance. The city manager of the City of Cairo, his authorized representative, or other such duly authorized inspector as may be designated by the city council of the City of Cairo is hereby authorized to inspect any premises in the City of Cairo for the purpose of seeing that the requirements of this article are being complied with and it shall be unlawful for any person whomsoever to resist or interfere with such representative by word, deed or act in the performance of such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 6, 1-23-89) 
Cross reference— Private property declared a nuisance, § 12-22. 
Sec. 13-46. - Enforcement in streets, sidewalks, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, or otherwise deposit or cause to be swept, thrown or otherwise deposited any garbage, rubbish, or other refuse (except leaves) into or on any public streets, alley, sidewalk, park or the property of another person or property which is in the possession of another person within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo or permit any garbage, rubbish or other refuse to accumulate in such manner that it may be carried and deposited into or on any of the above places by action of the rain, wind or snow. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 7, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-47. - Enforcement in drainage areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, or otherwise deposit or cause to be swept, thrown or otherwise deposited into or on any canal, stream, public water drain, sewer or receiving basin within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo, any garbage, rubbish, or other refuse or permit same to accumulate in such manner that it may be carried and deposited into or on any of the above places by action of the rain, wind or snow. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 8, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-48. - Enforcement of tampering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any garbage, rubbish, refuse or other like materials from any garbage can or other container within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo after it has been placed therein, except under the orders of any officer, agent, or employee of the sanitation department or by some other person removing same for disposal. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 9, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-49. - Method of collection; fees. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the City of Cairo a garbage, rubbish and refuse collection, hauling and disposal service operated by the Cairo Sanitation Department. The collection, hauling and disposal of garbage, rubbish and other refuse shall be made by the sanitation department generally not less than one collection per week for each customer. In cases requiring collection and disposal at more frequent intervals, charges for such additional service shall be computed on a base charge as is established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)  No less than annually, the mayor and council shall review the charge for the collecting, hauling and disposal of garbage, rubbish and other refuse. The charge for residential and commercial customers shall be established from time to time by resolution by mayor and council. All residential and commercial customers desiring service residing outside the corporate limits of the City of Cairo shall be charged one and one half times the rate charged similar customers living within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo. 
(c)  All persons residing or having a place of business within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo shall be required to use garbage, rubbish and refuse collection, hauling and disposal service provided by the City of Cairo through the city utilities department, and pay, when due, the proper charge for said service until the City of Cairo has been notified to discontinue service. For good and reasonable cause, the City of Cairo may excuse such persons from the use and payment of said service. 
(d)  All bills for service hereunder shall be due and payable as billed. 
(e)  All payments for garbage, rubbish and refuse collection, hauling and disposal service shall be made to the city utilities department of the City of Cairo. 
(f)  No garbage, rubbish and refuse collection, hauling and disposal service shall be rendered by the City of Cairo to any person whose account for said service is delinquent. 
(g)  All commercial customers having a rear and front entrance will be required to place all garbage, rubbish, and other waste in proper containers, i.e., bags or cans, and place said waste outside the rear entrance in a location designated by the sanitation department. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 10, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 592, § 1, 7-14-03) 
Cross reference— Rates for utility service, § 13-4. 
Sec. 13-50. - Placement of commercial containers. 
All garbage cans, rubbish containers and other refuse for collection by the sanitation department from commercial establishments shall be placed at places to be designated by the sanitation department on the days and between the hours designated by the sanitation department. The sanitation department shall have the authority to determine the necessity of a commercial container and designate the number of pickups required per week. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 11, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-51. - Placement of household containers. 
All garbage containers, rubbish containers and other refuse for collection by the sanitation department for residences shall be placed at a point conveniently accessible to the collection crews prior to being collected by the sanitation department; provided, however, that the sanitation department may at any time designate the point from which such collection will be made from each residence. The container shall be placed at a safe location upon or adjacent to the right-of-way and shall be removed by the occupier of the property from said location following collection by the sanitation department to a location off of the right-of-way by 7:00 a.m. on the date following the date of collection. The continued failure of the customer to remove and place the garbage container off the right-of-way shall subject the occupier of the property to punishment provided by section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances following written notice to the customer of the obligation to remove the container by the city. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 12, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 612, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 13-52. - Conditions for removal of garbage and rubbish. 
No garbage and rubbish will be collected by the City of Cairo Sanitation Department unless same is deposited in the garbage can or garbage bag defined in this article. No rubbish or refuse will be collected by the City of Cairo Sanitation Department except as follows: 
(1)  Trees, limbs, and stumps, will only be collected if not larger than twelve (12) inches in diameter and less than four (4) feet in length if placed along side the roadway by the resident of the property. No person who is engaged in the general business of real estate development, land clearing or development, or construction shall be eligible for refuse or rubbish pick-up unless such person resides upon the property from which the refuse or rubbish is taken. 
(2)  Citizens who engage a contractor who produces rubbish or refuse are responsible to have the contractor remove all debris. 
(3)  The first load of debris placed along the roadway by a resident as set forth herein will be removed by the city at no charge; however, all debris created by the work of the residents themselves following the first load shall be charged at the rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per load. 
(4)  No contractors, developers, real estate agents and/or builders shall place trash, trees, limbs, rubbish, stumps, construction materials or debris of any nature upon the right-of-way but shall be responsible for the removal of those items to the location designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 13, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 11-11-96; Ord. No. 498, § 1, 1-12-98; Ord. No. 618, § 1, 7-12-04) 
Sec. 13-53. - Conditions for removal of building materials, tree and yard waste. 
(a)  Building materials and tree removal/trimming debris shall be removed by contractor if the citizen employs a contractor for the work. 
(b)  Building material and tree removal/trimming debris will be removed by the sanitation department only if work is performed by the citizen. The sanitation department will pick up the first load (twenty-three (23) cubic yards maximum) at no charge. The charge for each additional load (twenty-three (23) cubic yards maximum) shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per load (twenty-three (23) cubic yards maximum) plus the tipping fee. 
(c)  Yard waste generated by a contractor or citizen will be picked up by the sanitation department. The charge will be same as set forth in subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 14, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 498, 1-12-98) 
Sec. 13-54. - No tires picked up. 
No tires, casings, or portion thereof will be picked up by sanitation department personnel. These are to be disposed of by owner adhering to health regulations as prescribed by the article. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 15, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-55. - No appliances picked up. 
No refrigerators, stoves or similar appliances with exterior dimensions greater than eighteen (18) inches by eighteen (18) inches by twelve (12) inches will be collected or picked up by the sanitation department personnel. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 16, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-56. - Separation of garbage and rubbish. 
All garbage will be placed by itself in proper containers, as defined; all limbs and wood products are to be separated from other yard clippings, rubbish, or refuse. All grass clippings and leaves are to be separated so that they may be stored or utilized in such a manner so as to maximize the beneficial use and recycling of yard trimmings. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 17, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 470, § 2, 9-9-96) 
Sec. 13-57. - Dangerous garbage or rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful to place in any garbage or rubbish container dangerous liquids or substances which could cause injury to employees of the sanitation department engaged in removing refuse. Leaking and defective garbage cans with sharp or ragged edges likely to injure employees of the sanitation department engaged in removing refuse will not be serviced, and the sanitation department shall place on such cans a tag marked "CONDEMNED". 
(Ord. No. 347, § 18, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-58. - Designation of landfill as dump site. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, or cause to be dumped, any garbage, rubbish, or other refuse upon any property within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo other than the city landfill, as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 19, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-59. - Sanitary landfill charges. 
All residential, commercial and industrial landfill users will be charged for garbage and other, refuse delivered to the city landfill site at a rate/ton as set from time to time by the mayor and council. All persons/entities dumping garbage and rubbish at the city landfill shall provide their proper name and address and shall dump garbage and rubbish at the location designated. The City of Cairo shall submit bills for charges no less than monthly to those persons/entities. Fees are payable within ten (10) days of receipt of the bill from the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1, 10-13-03) 
Sec. 13-60. - Hauling of garbage and rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, haul or carry garbage, rubbish or other refuse through the streets, alleys or public places within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo without having the vehicle or container in which the same is to be carried or hauled, adequately secured and covered in a manner approved by the sanitation department. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 21, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-61. - Applicability. 
All provisions of this article shall apply to all places within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 22, 1-23-89) 
Sec. 13-62. - Violation; penalties. 
Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1, 10-13-03) 
Secs. 13-63—13-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL 

Sec. 13-70. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(a)  Commercial solid waste. All types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
(b)  Composting. The controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
(c)  Leachate collection system. A system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
(d)  Municipal solid waste. Any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
(e)  Municipal solid waste disposal facility. Any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
(f)  Municipal solid waste landfill. A disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
(g)  Yard trimmings. Leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 3, 9-9-96) 
Sec. 13-71. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to mix or place yard trimmings with the municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings will not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 3, 9-9-96) 
Sec. 13-72. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to maximize the beneficial use and recycling of the yard trimmings. Procedures regarding the selection, composting and collecting of yard trimmings shall be developed by the city sanitation department. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 3, 9-9-96) 
Sec. 13-73. - Violation, penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article by doing any act or thing declared by this article to be unlawful shall be guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or six (6) months imprisonment in the Grady County Jail. No garbage, rubbish or other refuse will be removed from the premises of any person failing to comply with the provisions of section 13-71 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 470, § 3, 9-9-96) 
Secs. 13-74—13-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USE OF WATER 

Sec. 13-80. - Authority of mayor and council to establish water use restriction. 
During such time as the State of Georgia shall decree a water use limitation or the mayor or council of the city shall find that a water emergency or delivery problems should exist within the city, the mayor and council shall in accordance with state law and/or regulation or if determined prudent following review of the water supply and water distribution system within the city shall establish regulations regarding the use of water within the city. The action taken by the mayor and council shall attempt to minimize the negative impact of the restriction of water use upon those receiving water service. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 1, 6-29-2000) 
Sec. 13-81. - Restriction on outdoor water[ing] of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horiticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable City of Cairo ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 723, § 2, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 13-82. - Punishment for violation of water use restrictions. 
All persons who violate the regulations regarding water use as established by mayor and council shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) following one (1) warning in writing regarding violation of the water use restrictions established by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 1, 6-29-2000; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 723, adopted Nov. 8, 2010, renumbered former § 13-81 as § 13-82. 
Secs. 13-83—13-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 13-90. - Powers and duties of the city. 
The city shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, or related services, to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of consumers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the city, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 1, 7-9-01) 
Secs. 13-91—13-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 13-121. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provisions of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells or springs which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 13-122. - Definitions. 
When used in this article the following words and phrases shall be the meanings given in this section: 
Hazardous waste or material. Any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to and increase in mortality or an increase in serous irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill. A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead. The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 2, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 13-123. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 3, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 13-124. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection areas: 
(a)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one (1) acre; and 
(b)  Any open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 4, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 13-125. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses of conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 13-124 of this article: 
(a)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(b)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(c)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings and street and driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 13-124 of this article; 
(d)  Sanitary landfills; 
(e)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(f)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(g)  Underground storage tanks; 
(h)  Sanitary sewer lines within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 5, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 13-126. - [Landfill area wellhead protection zone.] 
Landfill area wellhead protection zone area adjoining the City of Cairo landfill is as follows: 
(1)  There shall be no well of any type and nature installed within five hundred (500) feet of the north boundary of the City of Cairo landfill. 
(2)  There shall be no well of any type and nature installed within five hundred (500) feet of the south boundary of the City of Cairo landfill. 
(3)  There shall be no well of any type and nature installed within five hundred (500) feet of the west boundary of the City of Cairo landfill. 
(4)  There shall be no well of any type and nature installed within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the east boundary of the City of Cairo landfill. 
(Ord. No. 798, 11-13-17) 
Secs. 13-127—13-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AUTHORIZED DESIGNEE 

Sec. 13-131. - Authorized designee. 
The city manager, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(b)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(c)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this ordinance. 
(d)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this chapter. 
(e)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(f)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 2, 1-12-09) 
Chapter 14 - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; electrician's license, § 6-30; gas fitter's license, § 6-70; plumber's license, § 6-130; taxicab license, § 21-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 449, adopted June 29, 1995, provided that Art. I be stricken from the Code and a new Art. I, §§ 14-1—14-36 pertaining to occupation tax be added in lieu thereof. Formerly, Art. I, §§ 14-1—14-35, pertained to occupational license tax as derived from the Ord. No. 439, adopted Dec. 12, 1994. 

Sec. 14-1. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the City of Cairo. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the City of Cairo, Georgia, whether with a location in the City of Cairo or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the City of Cairo, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the City of Cairo, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term Cairo is used in this chapter, such term shall be construed to mean the City of Cairo, Georgia; wherever the term city is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this chapter, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)  (a)  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
(i)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
(ii)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
(iii)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
(iv)  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
(v)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(b)  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(i)  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
(ii)  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
(iii)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563 (a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a) (2); 
(iv)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
(v)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
(3)  Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project, but shall include vehicles from which the taking of orders and delivery of goods occurs. 
(4)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
(5)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph (8) of O.C.G.A. § 3671-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(6)  Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
(7)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, (Optional: but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize fifty (50) percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes). 
(8)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(9)  Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(10)  Employee shall be a person employed on a full-time basis as of January 1 of the year that the occupation tax is to be paid. For purposes of this chapter, full-time basis shall be considered to be an employee who works forty (40) hours or more weekly. For employees who work less than forty (40) hours weekly, the average weekly hours of such employees shall be added and the sum shall be divided by forty (40) to produce full-time position equivalents. Following division any remaining partial sum exceeding thirty-five (35) hours shall be considered a full-time position. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 451, § 1, 8-14-95) 
Sec. 14-3. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is set forth in section 14-4. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-4. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(2)  Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city: 

 
(3)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one (1) occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(4)  Any business or practitioner that shall begin its business or occupation following July 1 shall pay one-half of the usual occupation tax for the year that the occupation tax shall be due. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 451, § 2, 8-14-95) 
Sec. 14-5. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-6. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city and that line of business being noted by the city upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-7. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-8. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs (1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) (1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 14-4 of this chapter. 
(2)  A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by April 1 of each year. 
(4)  Notwithstanding inconsistent or conflicting regulations within this chapter, attorneys who are required to pay the occupation tax are not required to pay the occupation tax or otherwise register the City of Cairo as a precondition to the practice of law. Further, violation of this chapter by an attorney shall not result in imprisonment but may result in a fine as set forth herein. No information requested of an attorney shall result in the attorney being required to submit confidential information to the city and that attorney may redact the confidential information from such information that he shall submit to the city. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 503, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 14-9. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-10. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-11. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable April 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 30 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this chapter (excepting the year 1995 and [when such tax] shall be due and payable September 15, 1995). On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten (10) percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this chapter without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the judge of municipal court, be punished by a fine not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days, either or both in the discretion of the judge. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 451, § 3, 8-14-95) 
Sec. 14-12. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra-or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed shall be those gross receipts attributed to each city's location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one (1) jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Where the business has locations outside the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-13. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this chapter shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless ninety (90) percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business is devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-14. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-15. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-16. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-17. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Excepting the year 1995 when such date shall be September 15, 1995, each registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before April 1 of each year, and on April 1 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 14-18. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the city, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(c)  The city clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes that are delinquent or any other monies owing to the city. No license or occupation tax certificate shall be issued nor shall such be renewed until all debts are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 451, § 4, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 686, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 14-18. - Penalty for chapter violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before the city or county judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisoned not exceeding ten (10) days, either or both, in the discretion of the City of Cairo Judge. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-19. - City subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the Business Tax Ordinance for 1995 (this chapter) and succeeding years. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-20. - Businesses not covered by this chapter. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Those persons engaged in lawn care activities during the summer months who are nineteen (19) years of age or younger. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 11-11-96) 
Sec. 14-21. - Tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-22. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the City of Cairo, at the office of the clerk/treasurer, on April 1 each year and [shall be] delinquent if not paid on or before April 30 each year. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 451, § 5, 8-14-95) 
Sec. 14-23. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-24. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the clerk of the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The clerk of the city shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within thirty (30) days. Failure of submission of such books or records within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the City of Cairo. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the clerk of the City of Cairo at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of one (1) percent per month will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-25. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this chapter permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 14-25. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-26. - Effect of failure to comply with chapter provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for said business has been revoked as above, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-27. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the chapters and charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The lien for the occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the marshal/chief of police of the city upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. 
All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of the City of Cairo and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the clerk of the city against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-28. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-29. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-30. - Yard sales or casual sales. 
No person or organization shall conduct more than two (2) "yard sales", "salvage sales" or "organized or casual sale of goods" more than two (2) times during each calendar year without obtaining a license for general retail sales from the city. Likewise, no location shall be utilized as a location for a "yard sale" or for the casual sale of goods or merchandise without the person owning that location obtaining a proper license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95; Ord. No. 575, § 1, 4-22-02) 
Sec. 14-31. - Peddlers, going uninvited upon private premises. 
No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor shall go in and upon private residences in the city, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant thereof, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale, disposing of, or peddling or hawking goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-32. - Enforcement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the clerk of the city and the city's police department to see that the provisions of this article are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the clerk of the city and his/her assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in his/her judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is proper for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-33. - Provisions to remain in effect until changed by city council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council of the city. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-34. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the council shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-35. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
Sec. 14-36. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 449, 6-29-95) 
ARTICLE II. - CARNIVALS AND OTHER TRAVELING ENTERTAINMENT EXHIBITIONS 

Sec. 14-37. - Local sponsor required. 
All carnivals and entertainment shows or other special events of a duration of more than four (4) hours appearing within the City of Cairo shall have a public or not-for-profit sponsor duly organized and having a permanent Cairo address before being permitted to locate and open a carnival, entertainment show, or special event. Such public or not-for-profit organization shall be the party obtaining the permit to hold the event if same shall be required by the city and shall appear before the mayor and council at a regularly scheduled meeting at least thirty (30) days in advance of the event to request a permit. 
The mayor and council must approve all carnival or special event permit requests prior to the date(s) of the event. At the time of review by mayor and council, it shall address issues such as the site location, site plan, paper/debris left on the property, traffic patterns and parking and any other service issues related to the event. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 667, § 1, 8-13-07) 
Sec. 14-38. - Liability insurance, bond and permit, inspection required. 
All carnivals or entertainment shows having mechanical rides, livestock or animals interacting with the public shall be required to arrange and have available liability insurance or the sponsoring organization shall arrange and have in effect liability insurance in an amount of no less than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) at the time that the event shall be open to the public. All other entertainment events at the discretion of mayor and council be required to arrange and have available liability insurance in an amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
Before any permit or license is issued for a circus, carnival, performance or event, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk and treasurer of the city a cash bond in the minimum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to the regular license fee or as a damage deposit for the purpose of cleaning or repairing the event site. The deposit shall be made upon the condition that the applicant will clean up all paper and other material generated or left by the event so that the premises will be left in the same condition as when entered upon by the applicant. All markings or advertisement on poles and trees made by applicant shall be removed. 
Upon termination of the event, the city shall inspect the site and such amount of damage deposit as shall not be used to restore the event site to its prior condition will be refunded. 
It shall be the duty of the building official, chief of police and fire chief to see that proper inspections and patrols are made of the premises used for the activities licensed herein. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 667, § 1, 8-13-07) 
Sec. 14-39. - Penalty for violation. 
All violations of this article shall be punished as set forth within section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 667, § 1, 8-13-07) 
ARTICLE III. - BANKRUPT, FIRE OR SALVAGE SALES 

Sec. 14-40. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Bankrupt goods: Goods, wares or merchandise which have been sold or brought at a bankrupt, trustee or receiver sale. 
Shelf-worn goods: Goods which have been unpacked and placed in the general stock of goods, wares or merchandise of any retail merchant. 
Strictly bankrupt sale: A sale by one who advertises by placard or otherwise over such person's store or place of business, or in any newspaper or by handbills, or otherwise that a bankrupt sale is being carried on in such store or place of business, or that the stock therein being sold is a bankrupt stock. 
(Code 1965, § 5-20) 
Sec. 14-41. - License for sale of bankrupt or shelf-worn goods. 
There is hereby levied a licensed tax in the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) upon each one hundred dollar ($100.00) purchase of bankrupt or shelf-worn goods brought or shipped into the city for the purpose of sale. 
(Code 1965, § 5-21) 
Sec. 14-42. - Strictly bankrupt sales—Contents of advertisements. 
If any bankrupt sale of goods or merchandise is advertised, such advertisement shall state the former location and owner of the stock offered for sale within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 5-22) 
Sec. 14-43. - Same—Additions to stock prohibited. 
No person shall add any additional merchandise to a strictly bankrupt sale conducted as such within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 5-23) 
Sec. 14-44. - Permit for additions to bankrupt, fire or salvage stock—Required. 
When any bankrupt, fire or salvage stock of goods shall be sold or offered for sale, no addition to the stock of goods shall be made, nor shall such stock be offered for sale after any additional merchandise or goods have been added thereto, without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(Code 1965, § 5-24) 
Sec. 14-45. - Same—Issuance. 
The permit shall be granted only after the licensing officer shall find that additions to bankrupt, fire or salvage stocks are of new and salable merchandise. 
(Code 1965, § 5-25) 
Sec. 14-46. - Same—When permit prohibited. 
No permit shall be granted authorizing additions to bankrupt, fire or salvage stocks of goods, wares and merchandise from any other stock of fire, bankrupt, or salvage goods and merchandise, whether or not located within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 5-26) 
Sec. 14-47. - Combining stocks of merchandise—Prohibited. 
No person shall combine, in whole or in part, one or more bankrupt, fire or salvage stocks of goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of offering same for sale with any other stock of goods, wares or merchandise at retail within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 5-27) 
Sec. 14-48. - Same—Interpretation. 
It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intention of section 14-47 that any such stock of goods, wares and merchandise shall be sold or offered for sale separately when sold at retail within the city. 
(Code 1965, § 5-28) 
Sec. 14-49. - Same—Selling or offering for sale. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale at retail any stocks of goods, wares or merchandise after they have been so combined contrary to the above provisions. 
(Code 1965, § 5-29) 
Secs. 14-50—14-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS; SECONDHAND DEALERS; PRECIOUS METALS, ETC., DEALERS 

Sec. 14-60. - Pawnbrokers—Informational forms. 
Every person engaged in the business of pawnbroker, or engaged in the business of lending money on articles kept by the lender until repayment, and who also purchases such articles as guns, pistols, knives, musical instruments, apparel, jewelry, household articles, appliances and the like, are hereby required to obtain and keep the following information on forms furnished by the police department: 
(1)  Name and address of pawnbroker engaged in the transaction. 
(2)  Date and time of transaction. 
(3)  Name, address and driver's license number and social security number of the customer pledging or selling. 
(4)  A description of the general appearance of the customer, together with anyone who is accompanying the customer. 
(5)  Customer's age, to be verified by driver's license or other bona fide identification card. 
(6)  Details of transaction: Was it a loan or pledged article, or an outright purchase, together with the amount loaned or paid for such article. 
(7)  Copy of the receipt or pawn ticket and number of same. 
(8)  A complete description of the article, including any brand name, serial number, model number, color, condition and any other identifying feature. 
(9)  Date and time and the same information required above in event of a redemption or repurchase of the pledged or purchased article. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-1, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-61. - Same—Records open to police inspection; retaining. 
(a)  Records containing the information required by section 14-60 shall be kept at the place of business of such pawnbroker or other person as above defined and such records shall be open to visitation and inspection by the chief of police or any other police officer of the city upon request, who shall be allowed sufficient time to copy same. 
(b)  The records shall be kept for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 249, §§ 22-2, 22-4, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-62. - Same—Invoices of new merchandise. 
All invoices of new merchandise shall be kept the same as the information required by section 14-60 and subject to inspection by police as provided in section 14-61. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-3, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-63. - Same—Holding period of articles pledged or purchased. 
Any article pawned, pledged, given as security or purchased shall be kept in the establishment for at least a period of ten (10) business days and shall be subject to inspection by police as provided for in section 14-61 and shall be pointed out to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-4, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-64. - Same—Surety bond. 
All pawnbrokers, or persons identified and doing business as defined in section 14-60 are hereby required to file with the city clerk a bond binding the person, to the city in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), executed by the person as principal, and by a surety approved by the city manager, conditioned that such person will comply fully with the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state governing the conduct of such business and conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this article, and upon the prompt report of all suspicious persons dealing with the obligor, and of stolen property or property suspected of being stolen, and for the returning to the chief of police or to the true and lawful owner of any such property or making payment therefor. The bond shall be taken in the name of the licensee and the city and any person injured by the breach of said bond may bring an action on said bond in such person's own name to recover damages therefor. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-7, 2-9-81; Ord. No. 317, § 1, 9-14-87) 
Sec. 14-65. - Same—Identification and age of pawnor or seller. 
No article may be taken in pledge or purchased from a customer who does not furnish the information required by section 14-60; nor may any transaction be made with any person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, and such parent or legal guardian shall furnish bona fide identification of such fact. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-5, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-66. - Gold and silver, etc., buyers—Informational forms. 
Every person in the business of buying gold and silver articles, precious gems, jewelry, or coins, or who buys such articles is hereby required to obtain and keep the following information on forms furnished by the police department: 
(1)  Name and address of person engaged in the transaction. 
(2)  Date and time of transaction. 
(3)  Name, address and driver's license number and social security number of the person selling such gold, silver, precious gems, jewelry, coins or other such article. 
(4)  A description of the general appearance of the customer, together with anyone who is accompanying the customer. 
(5)  Customer's age to be verified by driver's license or other bona fide identification card. 
(6)  Details of transaction: Was it a purchase, together with the amount paid for each article or item and a copy of and the number of sales slip, purchase slip or invoice, the receipt, of same. 
(7)  A complete description of the articles purchased, including any brand name, serial number, model number, color, condition and any other identifying feature. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-8, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-67. - Same—Records open to police inspection; retaining. 
(a)  The records required by section 14-66 shall be kept at the place of business of the person buying gold, silver, etc., as above defined and such records shall be open to visitation and inspection by the chief of police or any other police officer of the city upon request, who shall be allowed sufficient time to copy same. 
(b)  The records shall be kept for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 249, §§ 22-9, 22-11, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-68. - Same—Invoices of new merchandise. 
All invoices of any new merchandise alleged to have been purchased shall be kept the same as the information required by section 14-66 and subject to inspection by police as provided in section 14-67. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-10, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-69. - Same—Holding period of articles. 
Any article or articles, precious gems, or jewelry purchased shall be kept in the establishment and within the city for at least a period of ten (10) business days and shall be subject to inspection by police as provided in section 14-67 and shall be pointed out to any officer upon request. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-11, 2-9-81; Ord. No. 695, § 1, 6-26-08) 
Sec. 14-70. - Same—Identification and age of seller. 
No article may be purchased from anyone who does not furnish the information required by section 14-66, nor may any transaction be made with any person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, and such parent or legal guardian shall furnish bona fide identification of such fact. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-12, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-71. - Same—Surety bond. 
All gold and silver buyers and persons in the business of buying gold and silver articles, precious gems, jewelry, or coins, including department stores that have jewelry counters and are in the business of purchasing or selling gold and silver articles, precious gems, jewelry, and coins (exclusive of the purchase or sale of gold and silver articles, precious gems, jewelry, and coins to or from their manufacturers or their manufacturers' representatives), are hereby required to file with the city clerk before transacting any such business a bond binding the person to the city in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) executed by the person as principal and by a surety approved by the city manager, conditioned, as follows: That such person will comply fully with the ordinances of the city, and specifically the terms of this article, and the statutes of the state governing the conduct of such business; that such person will pay all fines and judgments rendered against the business owner for any violation of such ordinances or statutes and all judgements that may be recovered against such person by any person for damages growing out of any misrepresentation, deception, or breach of warranty in the conduct of such business; that action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city for the benefit and use of any aggrieved person. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-14, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-72. - Same—Exceptions. 
The provisions of section 14-66 et seq., regulating captioned gold and silver buyers, or persons in the business of buying gold and silver articles, precious gems, jewelry, or coins, shall not apply to bulk sales made by one business to another in the process of a complete transfer or change of business identity or a closeout sale of an existing business, nor shall the provisions of said sections apply to sales made by an executor or administrator done under and in compliance with a proper order of a court of record or under the power of sale contained in a last will and testament. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-15, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-73. - Stolen articles; surrender of same. 
Any article found by the police department to be stolen property shall be surrounded to the police officers and no payment for same shall be made by the city. 
(Ord. No. 249, §§ 22-6, 22-13, 2-9-81) 
Sec. 14-74. - Revocation of license for violations; penalty. 
(a)  All licenses issued to pawnbrokers and gold and silver buyers shall be issued subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any violation thereof shall be punished by revocation of such license and further punished as provided in section 1-8, or as an alternative such offender will be prosecuted in a state court for the violation of the criminal laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 22-15, 2-9-81) 
Secs. 14-75—14-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSURANCE BUSINESS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 436, §§ 1—6, adopted Oct. 25, 1994, provided for the imposition of license fees or insurers. Such provisions did not specify manner of codification, but have been designated by the editor as Art. V, §§ 14-80—14-85. The user's attention is also directed to the editor's footnote to Art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 14-80. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Cairo, Georgia, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). For each separate business location in excess of one (1) not covered by section 14-81, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 14-81. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of seventeen dollars and fifty cents ($17.50) per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 2, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 14-82. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 14-80 hereof in the amount of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for each such location within the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 3, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 14-83. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1 "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 14-80. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 4, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 14-84. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 14-80. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 5, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 14-85. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 14-80 and 14-81 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 6, 10-25-94) 
Secs. 14-86—14-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELEPHONE FEES 

Sec. 14-90. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in paragraphs (8) and (9) of subsection (b) of Section 46-5-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1, 1-12-09) 
Secs. 14-91—14-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SWEEPSTAKES PARLORS, INTERNET CAFES, AND SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 14-100. - Findings of the city council. 
The "Whereas" clauses set forth above are incorporated by reference into this article and represent the legislative findings of the Council of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
As used within this article, the following terms, when capitalized, shall have the meanings set forth below: 
(1)  Business entity. The term "business entity" means one (1) or more persons engaging in activities for a profitable or charitable purpose either individually or through the use of any of the following: 
•  Company or corporation; 
•  General partnership; 
•  Joint venture; 
•  Limited liability company; 
•  Limited liability partnership; 
•  Limited partnership; 
•  Sole proprietorship; 
•  A trust; or 
•  Any other form of business organization. 
(2)  Effective date. The term "effective date" means September 26, 2011. 
(3)  Electronic machine or device. The term "electronic machine or device" means a mechanically, electrically, or electronically operated machine or device, including but not limited to a computer, that is owned, leased, possessed by, or under the control of a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the sweepstakes sponsor's or promoter's partners, affiliates, parent corporation, brother or sister corporations, subsidiaries, or contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant that uses energy and that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other type of display. This section is applicable to any electronic machine or device whether or not: 
a.  It is server based; 
b.  It uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of the prize or prizes associated with results of the sweepstakes entries; 
c.  It utilizes software such that the simulated game influences or determines the winning or value of the prize to be won or awarded; 
d.  It selects prizes from a predetermined, finite pool of entries; 
e.  It utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a pre-determined sweepstakes entry; 
f.  It pre-determines the prize results and stores those results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed; 
g.  It utilizes software to create a game result; 
h.  It requires the deposit of any money, or token, or the use of a credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of payment to activate the machine or device; 
i.  It requires purchase of a related product or service, which has legitimate value; 
j.  It reveals a prize incrementally, even though it may not influence if a prize is awarded or the value of any prize awarded; 
k.  It determines and associates the prize with an entry or entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered; and/or 
l.  It is a slot machine or other form of electrical, mechanical, or computer game. 
(4)  Enter or entry. The terms "enter" or "entry" mean the act or process by which a person becomes eligible to receive a prize in a sweepstakes. 
(5)  Entertaining display. The term "entertaining display" means visual information, capable of being seen by a sweepstakes entrant, which takes the form of actual game play, or simulated play, such as the following electronic games: 
a.  A video poker game or any other kind of video playing card game; 
b.  A video bingo game; 
c.  A video craps game; 
d.  A video keno game; 
e.  A video lotto game; 
f.  Eight-liner or any other electronic game that is identical in its operational display or operation to eight-liner regardless of the name of the name or machine on which it is operated; 
g.  "Pot-of-gold" or any other electronic game that is identical in its operational display or operation to "pot-of-gold" regardless of the name of the game or the machine on which it is operated; 
h.  A video or electronic game based on or involving the random or chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers, or symbols not dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player of the game; or 
i.  A gambling device. 
(6)  Gambling device. The term "gambling device" shall have the same definition as O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2); 
(7)  Internet cafe. The term "Internet cafe" means a place: 
a.  Where one (1) or more persons can: 
•  Connect to the Internet using a publicly accessible computer for free or for the payment of a fee or any other consideration; or 
•  Connect to the Internet using their own computers by using a wireless connection in their local area networking provided by the owner or operator of the cafe; and 
b.  Where any food or drinks are served either for free or for a fee for consumption on-site; and 
c.  Where the principal activities conducted via the Internet include, but are not limited to: 
•  Reading or composing email; or 
•  Reading or posting to newsgroups; or 
•  Website surfing; or 
•  Viewing social networking web sites; or 
•  Composing or editing documents or spreadsheets; or 
•  Scanning or printing digital services; or 
•  Playing online games for which no payment or consideration is paid to the Internet cafe owner or operator; and 
d.  Which does not run or operate any sweepstakes; and 
e.  Which does not, in addition to providing access to the Internet for a fee or other consideration, also provide the user with a credit or credits to enter or play a game on any of the computers within the Internet cafe. 
(8)  Prize. The term "prize" means any gift, award, good, service, credit, or anything else of value, which may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the gift, award, good, service, credit or other item of value is actually transferred to that person, or placed on an account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the gift, award, good, service, credit or other item of value. 
(9)  Sweepstakes. The term "sweepstakes" means any game, advertising scheme or plan, other promotion which, with or without payment of any consideration, a person may enter to win or become eligible to receive a prize, when the determination of the receipt of such prize is based, in whole or in part, on chance. 
(10)  Sweepstakes parlor. The term "sweepstakes parlor" means an establishment that operates or places into operation one or more electronic machines or devices that, upon payment of consideration to the operator of the establishment, either: 
a.  Conducts a sweepstakes through the use of an entertaining display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; 
b.  Promotes a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an entertaining display, including the entry process or reveal of a prize. 
c.  Utilizes any devices as defined in paragraphs (5) and (6) above. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-102. - Ban on certain activities associated with sweepstakes parlors. 
Any activity which requires participants in a sweepstakes scheme to (1) make payment of any tangible consideration to the operator of a "sweepstakes parlor" in the form of money or other property of value; or (2) purchase any goods, wares, merchandise, or anything of value from such business in order to be eligible for a prize, is considered to be an illegal lottery and is hereby banned and prohibited. Provided further, however, that the ban on the activities set forth in this article shall not preclude the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and an occupation tax certificate to an Internet cafe as defined herein. Any person or business entity who or which wishes to open a business as an Internet cafe must provide a signed, notarized statement and submit it to the office of the City Clerk of the City of Cairo which certifies that the business is not a sweepstakes parlor as that term is defined herein. No occupational tax certificate or certificate of occupancy shall be issued or renewed unless and until this signed, notarized statement is submitted to the office of the City Clerk of the City of Cairo. Should the signed, notarized statement prove to be false, the occupational tax certificate and certificate of occupancy shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-103. - Permitted locations. 
Internet cafes shall be permitted only in the following zones: C-2 (Highway Commercial District). 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-104. - Unlawful operation; declared nuisance. 
In addition to the provisions of subsection 14-101(3), above, the City Council for the City of Cairo declares that any establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, the city may seek the commencement of an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal of enjoinment thereof, all in a manner contemplated by and provided for O.C.G.A. tit. 41. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-105. - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the terms of this article and any such violation shall be punishable in the municipal court of the city as provided in section 5.13 of the Charter of the City. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an operator of an Internet cafe to permit any conduct prohibited in this article which the licensee knows or has reasonable cause to know is taking place on the premises. Any such conduct by an operator of an Internet cafe shall be a violation of this Code and shall be punishable in the municipal court of the city as provided. 
(c)  For purposes of interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this section, this article specifically adopts by reference and incorporates herein the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 through § 16-12-36 and the definitions contained therein. In the event of any conflict between a provision and definition contained in the sections of the Official Code of Georgia adopted herein, the Official Code of Georgia shall control. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-106. - On-premises operator required. 
An Internet cafe shall have a designated person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-107. - Open to inspection. 
Any establishment operating under this article shall at any time that the premises is open to the public for business be open also to inspection by any officer of the police department, any building inspector of the city, or fire department inspector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-108. - Consumption; open containers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business operating under this article to permit any person to drink at any time any whiskey, wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverage of any kind or description upon the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this article to permit at any time any glass containing any alcoholic beverage, or any opened or unemptied bottle or other open container of any alcoholic beverage to remain in or on the premises of the place of business. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 14-109. - Severability. 
Should any phrase, clause, or section of this article be deemed unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of this article, which provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 734, § I, 9-12-11) 
Secs. - 14-110—14-119. reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 744, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, states "This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the Mayor and Council, except that the imposition of the excise tax shall become effective as governed by Sec. 14-124, Commencement of Collections and by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 48-13-116." 

Sec. 14-120. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Cairo Energy Excise Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-121. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public finance. Georgia law authorizes counties and municipalities to impose an excise tax on the sale or use of energy but the imposition of the excise tax on the sale or use of energy in the law is contingent upon the enactment of an ordinance of the municipality in question. In order for the municipality to properly impose such excise tax, the municipality must follow all of the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter 13 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, one provision of which is the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-122. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Dealer shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Energy shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Local sales and use tax shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Purchaser shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-123. - Energy excise tax imposed. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter 13 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia annotated, there is imposed within the territorial limits of the municipality, an excise tax on the sale or use of energy when such sale or use would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under Article 1 of Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated but for the exemption found in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(b)  The sale or use of energy when such sale or use would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under Article 1 of Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated but for the exemption found in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2 includes, but is not limited to, the sales and use of energy that is necessary and integral to the manufacture of tangible personal property such as: 
(1)  Machinery or equipment used to convey or transport industrial materials, work in process, consumable supplies, or packaging materials at or among manufacturing plants or to convey and transport finished goods to a distribution or storage point at the manufacturing plant. Specific examples may include, but are not limited to, forklifts, conveyors, cranes, hoists, and pallet jacks; 
(2)  Machinery or equipment used to gather, arrange, sort, mix, measure, blend, heat, cool, clean, or otherwise treat, prepare, or store industrial materials for further manufacturing; 
(3)  Machinery or equipment used to control, regulate, heat, cool, or produce energy for other machinery or equipment that is necessary and integral to the manufacture of tangible personal property. Specific examples may include, but are not limited to, boilers, chillers, condensers, water towers, dehumidifiers, heat exchangers, generators, transformers, motor control centers, solar panels, air dryers, and air compressors; 
(4)  Testing and quality control machinery or equipment located at a manufacturing plant used to test the quality of industrial materials, work in process, or finished goods; 
(5)  Starters, switches, circuit breakers, transformers, wiring, piping, and other electrical components, including associated cable trays, conduit, and insulation, located between a motor control center and exempt machinery or equipment or between separate units of exempt machinery or equipment; 
(6)  Machinery or equipment used to maintain, clean, or repair exempt machinery or equipment; 
(7)  Machinery or equipment used to provide safety for the employees working at a manufacturing plant, including, but not limited to, safety machinery and equipment required by federal or state law, gloves, ear plugs, face masks, protective eyewear, hard hats or helmets, or breathing apparatuses, regardless of whether the items would otherwise be considered consumable supplies; 
(8)  Machinery or equipment used to condition air or water to produce conditions necessary for the manufacture of tangible personal property, including pollution control machinery or equipment and water treatment systems; 
(9)  Pollution control, sanitizing, sterilizing, or recycling machinery or equipment; 
(10)  Industrial materials brought for further processing in the manufacture of tangible personal property for sale or further processing or any part of the industrial material or by-product thereof which becomes a wasteful product contributing to pollution problems and which is used up in a recycling or burning process; 
(11)  Machinery or equipment used in quarrying and mining activities, including blasting, extraction, and crushing; and 
(12)  Energy used at a manufacturing plant. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-124. - Energy excise tax rate and phase-in. 
(a)  The rate of the excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be phased in over a four-year period as directed by the O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112(a)(3) and 48-13-112(b) and as set forth below: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to seventy-five (75) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(b)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016, limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(c)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2014, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of the city shall be directed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two (2) percent. 
(d)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two (2) percent to one (1) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(e)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one (1) percent to two (2) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-125. - Energy excise tax imposition, remittance and recovery. 
(a)  The excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be imposed at the time and be recoverable as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(b)  The excise tax shall be a debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(c)  The dealer collecting the excise tax shall remit the excise tax to the city if the city is the governing authority imposing the excise tax as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(d)  Every dealer subject to an excise tax under this article shall be liable for the excise tax at an applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of the excise taxes collected from the purchasers, whichever is greater as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-126. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city, or the collecting officer appointed under this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the city and to ascertain whether such purchasers have completed a uniform exemption certificate provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser under the exemption found in the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue. The energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed under this article if a purchaser has failed to submit the uniform exemption certificate provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue to such energy provider. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-127. - Commencement of collections and due date. 
(a)  The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013. 
(b)  The excise tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time that sales and use tax on the sale and use of such energy would have been due and payable under the O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  The excise tax shall be due and payable in the same manner as would otherwise be required under Article 1 of Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(d)  All sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month shall be due and payable to the City of Cairo monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-128. - Expenditure of proceeds. 
The proceeds of the excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall not be subject to any use or expenditure requirements provided for under any of the local sales and use taxes but shall be authorized to be expended in the same manner as otherwise would have been required under such local sales and use taxes or may be expended for any lawful purpose as governed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). Any proceeds received by the city pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-129. - Termination of municipal excise tax. 
(a)  If the city has levied and collected an excise tax within the corporate limits of municipality under this article because the county in which the city is located has refused or failed to enter into an intergovernmental agreement with each municipality wishing to participate in such excise tax as allowed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-115(a)(1) and then the county determines to commence proceedings for the imposition of the excise tax as allowed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-115(b)(2), then the excise tax levied and collected by the municipality shall cease to the extent as provided for the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-115(b)(2). 
(b)  If the county has commenced proceedings for the imposition of the excise tax as allowed by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-115 (b)(2) and the excise tax levied and collected by the municipality has terminated and the municipality has chosen to participate in the county excise tax, then this article shall remain effective for the purposes of Article 6 of Chapter 13 of Tide 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and particularly for the rates required by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 14-130. - Administrative provisions and audit. 
(a)  The city governing authority shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. 
(c)  The collecting officer, or designee, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of and locations within the city of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax to the energy dealer under this article. 
(d)  As part of the audit report required by the O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Secs. 14-131—14-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FIREWORKS, LICENSE AND SALE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 766, § 1, adopted June 8, 2015, enacted new provisions designated as art. VIII, §§ 14-120—14-122. Inasmuch as article and sections so numbered already exist, said provisions have been redesignated as art. IX, §§ 14-150—14-152 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 14-150. - Sale of fireworks. 
The sale of fireworks is permitted as authorized by Georgia state law as follows: 
(1)  All fireworks shall be sold in the district having zoning classification C-2. 
(2)  Temporary structures for the sale of fireworks may only be set up and sold within one thousand (1,000) feet of a fire hydrant or fire department unless the city fire marshal shall permit the designated location in writing. 
(3)  Non-profit groups benefitting from the sale of fireworks shall directly participate in operating a temporary fireworks retail stand. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 14-151. - License to sale fireworks. 
(a)  The license fee to sell consumer fireworks at a permanent location such as a retail sale facility or store shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per location. The application for license shall be available at city hall and shall issue upon submission of a properly completed application. 
(b)  The license fee to sell consumer fireworks at a temporary retail sales stand shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per location. The application for license shall be available at City Hall and shall issue upon submission of a properly completed application. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 14-152. - Use of fireworks. 
The use of fireworks is permitted only on the days and during such hours as is permitted by Georgia state law. The use of fireworks shall be prohibited at such locations as are prohibited by Georgia state law. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-8-15) 
Chapter 15 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Illegal noises, §§ 12-3, 12-4; peddlers going on property uninvited, § 14-19. 

Sec. 15-1. - Aiding and abetting violation. 
No person shall aid or abet another to violate any provision of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 20-1) 
State Law reference— Parties to crime, OCGA § 16-2-20 et seq. 
Sec. 15-2. - Conspiracy. 
No two (2) or more persons shall conspire together or plot to violate any of the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1965, § 20-3) 
State Law reference— Conspiracy, OCGA § 16-4-8. 
Sec. 15-3. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of disorderly conduct, if, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, such person shall: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; or 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; or 
(3)  Endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; or 
(4)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; or 
(5)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; or 
(6)  Jostle or roughly crowd or push any person in any public place; or 
(7)  Collect in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by the ordinances of the city; or 
(8)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in unlawful gaming; or 
(9)  Frequent any public place with intent to take money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; or 
(10)  Assemble for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, devise or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place from any person in the city or who shall aid or abet therein; or 
(11)  Accost or attempt to force his company upon any person, male or female, or attempt to pickup any person, male or female; or 
(12)  Utter or use in the presence of another any bawdy, lewd, abusive or obscene language or make an obscene gesture; or 
(13)  Frequent any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; or 
(14)  Use "fighting words" directed towards any person or becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; or 
(15)  Assemble or congregate for the purpose of trouncing on or accosting another; or 
(16)  By act of violence interfere with the pursuit of the lawful occupation of another; or 
(17)  Congregate with another or others on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and/or refuses to clear the public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority; or 
(18)  Congregate with another or other persons in a public place and refuse to comply with the lawful order of the police to disburse; or 
(19)  Operate a motor vehicle upon a parking area, public or private, vehicle access, or pedestrian walkway of any parking area and by sudden starting, stopping, or turning so as to endanger the person or property of another; or 
(20)  Operate a motor vehicle upon any parking area, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility at a speed great enough to endanger the person or property of another; or 
(21)  Operate a motor vehicle upon any pedestrian walkway or sidewalk, public or private in any manner; or 
(22)  Consume alcoholic beverages or possess or have under his control an open container of any alcoholic beverage in any public area including property of the city, state, or county by and through its elected or appointed political agencies or boards; or 
(23)  Operate a motor vehicle and have therein under his possession and/or control or the possession and/or control of any person within the automobile an open container of any type containing an alcoholic beverage; or 
(24)  Be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant or within a place of business patronized by the public, such condition made manifest by boisterousness, indecent condition or act or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language; or 
(25)  Aid, abet or encourage a minor to do any act which constitutes disorderly conduct or a breach of the peace. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of public indecency when he or she performs any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: 
(1)  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; 
(2)  A lewd exposure of the sexual organs; 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; or 
(5)  Urination or defecation. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in public wearing pants, shorts, or skirts more than three (3) inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "undergarments" shall include any article of clothing worn under the outer garments and next to the skin. Any person(s) violating this subsection may be warned by the law enforcement officer to pull up their pants, shorts, or skirts, and if they comply, said warning shall be the penalty for violation of this subsection. Failure by said person(s) to comply with said warning shall result in a charge of "disorderly conduct;" and a citation shall be issued to the offender, and the person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) on the first offense and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each subsequent offense. Any violation for this offense shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for an arrest or for search of the person cited. 
(Code 1965, § 20-4; Ord. No. 377, § 1, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 743, 11-12-12) 
State Law reference— Offenses against public order, OCGA § 16-11-30 et seq. 
Sec. 15-4. - Defacing city hall. 
No person shall spit upon, or make pencil marks or other marks upon the floors, walls, staircases or other parts of the city hall or deface or damage in any other manner any part of such building. 
(Code 1965, § 20-2) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, OCGA § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 15-5. - Weapons; discharging. 
(A)  No person shall negligently or purposely discharge any firearm, BB gun or slingshot within the city, except: 
(1)  In necessary self defense. 
(2)  A law enforcement officer in necessary performance of official duty. 
(3)  For the purpose of target shooting or practice on a range operated by qualified personnel. "Qualified personnel" shall consist of a certified firearms safety instructor, rifle or pistol marksmanship instructor certified by the national rifle association, or a person designated by a rifle or pistol club, public or private school or military agency. 
(4)  Target shooting on private premises with air or carbon dioxide-operated BB or with a pellet gun or slingshot, providing: 
(a)  The target area is enclosed in such manner and with such materials that will stop the projectiles. 
(b)  Such target shooting is supervised by an adult at all times. 
(c)  Any safety precautions recommended by the police chief are complied with. 
(5)  Where a permit has been issued by the police chief. 
(B)  "Firearms," as used in this section, shall mean any device that expels a projectile by means of expending gases. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-5, 20-6) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearms, OCGA § 16-11-103 et seq. 
Sec. 15-6. - Gambling. 
No two (2) or more persons shall assemble at any place within the city for the purpose of playing and betting for money or other thing of value on any game played with cards, dice or balls, or for the purpose of playing and betting for money or other thing of value on any game whatever. 
(Code 1965, § 20-7) 
State Law reference— Gambling, OCGA § 16-12-20 et seq. 
Sec. 15-7. - Lewd houses. 
(a)  No person shall keep or maintain a lewd or disreputable house for the purpose of engaging in lewd or disreputable acts. 
(b)  No person shall lodge or live in any such house. 
(c)  In any prosecution for violation of this section, it shall be considered sufficient evidence that such place is a rendezvous for persons, either male or female, of notoriously bad, disreputable or lewd habits. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-8, 20-9) 
State Law reference— Keeping place of prostitution, OCGA § 16-6-10; disorderly house, § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 15-8. - Congregating on sidewalks. 
No two (2) or more persons shall congregate on the sidewalks of the city so as to obstruct such sidewalks. 
(Code 1965, § 28-3) 
Sec. 15-9. - Loitering. 
(a)  No boy or girl under the age of sixteen (16) years shall loiter or remain upon the streets of the city after 11:00 p.m. without good cause or necessity. 
(b)  No person shall be in or remain in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
Such circumstances that may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that a person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern that would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Code 1965, § 20-10; Ord. No. 329, § 1, 8-8-88) 
Cross reference— Loitering in city parks and recreation areas, § 24-1. 
State Law reference— Loitering, OCGA § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 15-10. - Political activities on public streets and ways. 
No person shall stand on any public street or way in the city for the purpose of distributing political campaign literature, campaign cards, or soliciting votes. Such act shall be an offense and upon conviction the defendant shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1965, § 28-6; Ord. No. 248, 8-25-80) 
Sec. 15-11. - Parades—Definitions. 
As used in section 15-12, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Assemble: The action of any group of persons who congregate on any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of displaying, advertising, promoting, exhibiting, advocating or otherwise attracting public attention to or for any cause or thing. 
Parade: The action of any group of persons marching or promenading on and along any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of displaying, advertising, promoting, exhibiting, advocating or otherwise attracting public attention to or for any cause or thing. 
(Code 1965, § 20-14) 
Sec. 15-12. - Same—Permit required; participation in unlawful parade. 
(a)  No two (2) or more persons shall parade or assemble or congregate on any public street, alley or sidewalk in the city for a purpose set out in section 15-11 unless the governing body shall have previously approved and authorized such parade or assembly. 
(b)  Any person participating in or attending any parade or assembly which has not been so authorized and approved shall be considered a part of the group constituting such parade or assembly, and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1965, § 20-15) 
State Law reference— Unlawful assembly, OCGA § 16-11-33; refusal to disperse, § 16-10-30. 
Sec. 15-13. - Same—Permit application. 
Any two (2) or more persons proposing to parade or assemble on any of the public streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city for any of the purposes defined in section 15-11 shall file an application with the governing body setting out the time, place and purpose of such parade or assembly. Any application for a permit hereunder must be presented and action taken thereon at the next regular meeting of the governing body. 
(Code 1965, § 20-16; Ord. No. 172, § 1, 5-24-71) 
Sec. 15-14. - Same—Wearing masks. 
(a)  No two (2) or more persons shall parade upon the streets or within the city wearing masks or any other disguise or device whereby the identity of such persons is obscured or hidden or the license plate of automobiles are covered. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to parades at Halloween, Christmas, and other like traditional celebrations wherein it is the custom to wear masks, provided permission to do so is first obtained from the governing body. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-12, 20-13) 
State Law reference— Wearing masks, OCGA § 16-11-38. 
Sec. 15-15. - Entering and disturbing premises. 
(a)  No person shall enter the premises of another for the purpose of creating or provoking a disturbance or breach of the peace. 
(b)  In the interpretation and enforcement of this section, when any person enters upon the premises of another for a certain purpose and the fulfillment of accomplishment of such purpose, or attempt thereof, gives rise to, causes or provokes a disturbance or breach of peace, it shall be presumed that the entering upon the premises was for the purpose of creating or provoking such disturbance or breach of the peace. 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-22, 20-23) 
Sec. 15-16. - Energy load management program; disconnecting radio switches. 
(a)  No person, including specifically the following: Owner, tenant, occupant, electrician, air conditioner mechanic or maintenance person or any officer, agent or employee of any of the above, shall disconnect the radio switch on the control thermostat circuit on air conditioners that has been installed by the city as a part of the load management program, except by written authorization of the city manager or the designated agent of the city manager. 
(b)  No person shall claim or receive a refund from the city paid as incentive for cooperation with the load management program after the radio switch on the control thermostat circuit on air conditioners has been disconnected. 
(c)  The disconnection of said radio switch by any person, as above defined or identified in subsection (a) is an offense and upon conviction the defendant shall be punished as provided in section 1-8, and each week that said switch is disconnected shall be a new offense. 
(d)  The claiming or receiving of the refund set forth in subsection (b) above by any person shall be an offense and upon conviction the defendant shall be punished as provided in section 1-8, and each such claim for a refund or receipt of said refund shall be a new offense. 
(Code 1965, § 20-25; Ord. No. 247, 7-28-80) 
Sec. 15-17. - Possession of marijuana. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce, or less, of marijuana within the corporate limits of the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(a)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(b)  The jurisdiction of the municipal court of the City of Cairo shall be concurrent with the jurisdiction of any other court within the county having jurisdiction to try and dispose of such cases. 
(c)  Any fines and forfeitures arising from the prosecution of such cases shall be retained by the municipality and shall be paid into the treasury of such municipality. 
(d)  Any defendant charged with possession of an ounce or less of marijuana in a municipal court of the City of Cairo shall be entitled on request to have the case against him transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county wherein the alleged offense occurred. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 1, 2-25-85) 
Sec. 15-18. - Theft by shoplifting. 
(a)  No person acting alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, [shall commit the offense of shoplifting] by doing any of the following: 
(1)  Concealing or taking possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Altering the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transferring the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanging the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causing the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(b)  A person convicted of this offense shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(c)  The jurisdiction of the municipal court of the City of Cairo shall be concurrent with the jurisdiction of any other court within the county having jurisdiction to try and dispose of such cases. 
(d)  Any fines and forfeitures arising from the prosecution of such cases shall be retained by the municipality and shall be paid into the treasury of such municipality. 
(e)  Any defendant charged with the crime of theft by shoplifting in the municipal court of the City of Cairo shall be entitled on request to have the case against him transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county wherein the alleged offense occurred. 
(Ord. No. 331, § 1, 8-8-88) 
Sec. 15-19. - Simple assault. 
(a)  No person shall commit the offense of simple assault which shall be defined as an attempt to commit a violent injury to the person of another or committing an act which places another in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury. 
(b)  A defendant charged with simple assault in the Municipal Court of the City of Cairo shall be entitled upon request to have the case against the defendant transferred to a court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county where the alleged offense occurred. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 15-20. - Simple battery. 
(a)  No person shall commit the offense of simple battery which shall be defined as: 
(1)  An intentional physical contact of an insulting and provoking nature to another person; 
(2)  Intentional physical harm to another; or 
(3)  Intentionally causing visible harm to another which may include, but is not limited to, substantially blackened eyes, swollen lips or other facial or body parts or substantial bruises to body parts. 
(b)  A defendant charged with simple battery in the Municipal Court of the City of Cairo shall be entitled upon request to have the case against the defendant transferred to a court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county where the alleged offense occurred. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 2, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 15-21. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  No person shall commit the offense of criminal trespass. Criminal trespass shall be defined as: 
(1)  Intentionally damaging any property in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less of another without consent of that person or knowingly and maliciously interfering with the possession or use of the property of another person without the consent of that person; 
(2)  Knowingly and without authority entering upon the land or premises of another person or any part of a vehicle, watercraft or aircraft, of another person for an unlawful purpose; 
(3)  Entering upon the land or premises of another person or any part of any vehicle, watercraft or aircraft, after receiving prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant or upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner, that such entry is forbidden; or 
(4)  Remaining upon the land or premises of another or within any vehicle, watercraft or aircraft, after receiving notice from the rightful owner, rightful occupant or upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant, to depart. 
(b)  A defendant charged with criminal trespass in the Municipal Court of the City of Cairo shall be entitled upon request to have the case against the defendant transferred to a court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county where the alleged offense occurred. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 3, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 15-22. - Theft by taking. 
(a)  No person shall unlawfully take or be in unlawful possession thereof or unlawfully appropriate any property in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less of another with intention of depriving that person of the property, regardless of the manner in which the property is taken or appropriated. 
(b)  A defendant charged with theft by taking in the Municipal Court of the City of Cairo shall be entitled upon request to have the case against the defendant transferred to a court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county where the alleged offense occurred. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 4, 6-9-08) 
Chapter 16 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-20. - Plan continued in effect. 
The retirement plan of the city, established by ordinance enacted on August 13, 1971, and thereafter amended, copies of which are on file in the city clerk's office, is hereby made a part hereof and is continued in full force and effect, as fully as if set out at length herein. 
Secs. 16-21—16-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY 

Sec. 16-30. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest possible date under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal social security administrator, to the employees and officials thereof and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this division, the benefits of the system of old-age and survivors' insurance authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 134 of the 81st Congress, and as provided for in OCGA § 47-18-1 et seq. 
(Code 1965, § 24-11) 
Sec. 16-31. - Exclusions from coverage. 
There is hereby excluded from this division authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal law or regulations. 
(Code 1965, § 24-12) 
Sec. 16-32. - Firefighters and police officers specifically included in benefits. 
Firefighters and police officers of the city are hereby specifically included as employees of the city and are entitled to all benefits of the system of old-age and survivors' insurance provided by this division regardless of exclusions provided. 
(Code 1965, § 24-13) 
Sec. 16-33. - Agreements with state agency. 
The mayor or other chief executive officer of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the employees' retirement system of the state to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1965, § 24-14) 
Sec. 16-34. - Withholdings from salaries and wages. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in this division are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations, and shall be paid over to the employees' retirement system of the state. 
(Code 1965, § 24-15) 
Sec. 16-35. - Contributions by city. 
(a)  There shall be appropriated from the general funds of the city such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations for employers' contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in this division. 
(b)  Such funds shall be paid over to the employees' retirement system of the state in accordance with regulations established by such agency. 
(Code 1965, § 24-16) 
Sec. 16-36. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations. 
(Code 1965, § 24-17) 
Secs. 16-37—16-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CODE OF ETHICS[1] 
All government, of right, originates with the people, is founded upon their will only, and is instituted solely for the good of the whole. Public officers are the trustees and servants of the people and are at all times amenable to them.  (Georgia Constitution, Article 1, Section 11, Paragraph 1) 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 724, adopted Nov. 8, 2010, repealed the former art. III, §§ 16-45—16-64, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 

Sec. 16-45. - Purpose. 
The public trust requires public servants to fulfill their duties faithfully and honestly and to subordinate any personal interest which conflicts with the public interest. A public servant is a trustee of the people and should strive to further the general welfare and not use public office in order to improve his or her own private standing. The principle policies which form the foundation of this code of ethics are: 
(a)  The trust of citizens in their government is cultivated when individual public servants act with integrity and when the public is aware that its servants act with integrity. 
(b)  The constitutions, laws and regulations of the United States and State of Georgia and ordinances of the City of Cairo should be upheld as a de minimus standard of conduct. 
(c)  The most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act with the highest moral principles and to consistently react appropriately to the ethical decisions of others. 
(d)  Elected officials should exercise sound judgment and apply ethical principles in making decisions that in any manner reflect upon their elected office. 
(e)  All citizens should be treated with courtesy, impartiality and equality. 
(f)  Those persons who fail to abide by the terms of this code of ethics should be disciplined. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-46. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this code of ethics that any city official shall not knowingly engage in any activity which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her judgment or actions in the performance of his or her official duties. Furthermore, city officials should avoid any action which might result in or create the appearance of the following: 
(a)  Using public office for private gain. 
(b)  Impeding city efficiency or economy. 
(c)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of those who conduct the affairs and business of the City of Cairo. 
Not withstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-47. - Definitions. 
(a)  Benefit shall mean: 
(1)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, perceived or intended by either the one who offers it or the one to whom it is offered, to be sufficient in value to influence a city official in the performance or nonperformance of an official action; or 
(2)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, which, under the circumstances, a reasonably prudent person would recognize as being likely to be intended to influence a city official in the performance or nonperformance of an official action. 
(b)  City official or official shall mean, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding or elected to positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
(c)  Decision shall mean any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(d)  Employee shall mean any person who is employed in a position covered by the position classification plan of the City of Cairo; any person who is employed part-time by any operating department of the City of Cairo; and any person who is employed through a contractual agreement with the City of Cairo. 
(e)  Government or city shall mean the City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(f)  Immediate family shall mean spouse, child, parent, grandparent or sibling of any city official by blood, adoption or marriage. 
(g)  Interest shall mean any direct or indirect financial gain accruing to a city official as a result of a contract or transaction that is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by, or with, the city. Interest shall not mean any direct or indirect financial gain which is remote or insignificant. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-48. - Acceptance of gifts. 
A city official shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any benefit, special privilege, or exemption from any person, corporation or group which has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-49. - Financial interests. 
(a)  A city official may not: 
(1)  Have a direct or indirect financial interest that conflicts with his or her responsibilities and duties as a trustee of the public good. 
(2)  Either directly or indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained in the course of his or her office or received due to his or her position. 
(b)  A city official shall be deemed to have a financial interest in transactions involving the following: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family. 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits. 
(3)  Any business in which the city official is director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-50. - Use of public property. 
A city official shall not use City of Cairo property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for other than official purposes. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-51. - Use of confidential information. 
A city official shall not directly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, city information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-52. - Coercion. 
(a)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any benefits to him or her or to persons within his or her family, or for those with whom the city official has business or financial ties. 
(b)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a city employee, an appointed official of the city or a contract employee to provide any benefit to him or her or to persons within his or her immediate family. 
(c)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a municipal court judge in the outcome of matters before the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-53. - Purchases. 
A city official shall not order any goods or services for the City of Cairo or on behalf of the City of Cairo without prior authorization from the mayor and council or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-54. - City employees. 
A city official shall not use a city employee for personal or private business during regular business hours or during the employee's scheduled shift. A city official shall pay just compensation and shall not receive or expect a discount or special rate. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-55. - Travel expenses. 
A city official shall not draw per diem or expense money from the City of Cairo to attend a seminar, convention, conference or similar meeting and then fail to attend the seminar, conference, convention or similar meeting. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-56. - Commitments. 
A city official shall not act or create the appearance of acting on behalf of a member of council or other city official by promising to authorize or prevent any future official action of any nature, without prior authorization from the mayor and council or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-57. - Candidates. 
No person who has qualified seeking to become an elected official shall make a false or materially misleading statement or in any manner commit fraud or conceal wrong doing or withhold information regarding wrong doing in relation to any city or public business. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-58. - Disclosure. 
A city official shall disclose the nature of any interest or benefit he or she has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this code of ethics, the member shall not participate in any ex-parte communications with other members regarding the matter at hand. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-59. - Deliberation and vote prohibited. 
No city official shall participate in the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision-making process on any agenda item, any official act or action in which he or she or member of his or her immediate family has a conflict of interest. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-60. - Duty to leave meeting. 
To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after any city official is determined to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, the member of mayor and council shall leave his or her regular seat as a member of the council and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-61. - Ethics committee. 
The mayor and council shall appoint an ethics committee consisting of three (3) persons. At least one (1) member shall be an attorney in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia. All members shall be residents of the City of Cairo, shall have not been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude, unless the civil rights of that person have been restored for a period of ten (10) years and shall serve a three-year term. Members of the ethics committee must be approved by at least a two-thirds-vote of the mayor and council and shall be appointed initially in such manner as to permit one (1) term to terminate each year. The members of the ethics committee shall serve without compensation. A member of the ethics committee may be removed by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-62. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against a city official shall be filed in writing under oath with the city manager and referred to the ethics committee within five (5) days in such form as may be prescribed by the ethics committee. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall: 
(1)  Review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary action or is to be considered for further investigation. 
(2)  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city official; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he or she might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(3)  Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add to the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(4)  Be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings. Unless the complaint is found to be frivolous and unjustified, the board of ethics shall conduct a hearing according to procedures and regulations it establishes. The hearing shall be held no sooner than ten (10) days following written notice of same to the subject of the complaint, but no later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the complaint. At the hearing the city official who is the subject of the complaint shall have the right to counsel, the right to hear and examine witnesses and evidence, present evidence and oppose or mitigate the allegations. Failure to comply with deadlines shall not invalid any otherwise valid complaint or affect the power of the ethics committee to act. 
(5)  Make recommendations to the mayor and council to invoke disciplinary action as described within this article. The mayor and council shall take action upon the recommendation of the ethics committee at the next regular meeting of mayor and council following receipt of the recommendation. 
(6)  All actions taken by the ethics committee shall be taken within thirty (30) days of receipt of the complaint. The decision by the ethics committee shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties at interest within five (5) days of reaching a decision. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-63. - Right to appeal. 
Decisions of the mayor and council pursuant to this code of ethics for members of mayor and council shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Grady County upon notice in writing filed within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of the decision of the ethics committee. Review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the mayor and council which supported the decision of the mayor and council. Provided, however, no action of the mayor and council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Sec. 16-64. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this code of ethics shall subject the offender to: 
(a)  Disciplinary action which may include private reprimand, public reprimand, or impeachment. 
(b)  A fine up to six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
(Ord. No. 724, § 1, 11-8-10) 
Chapter 17 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 407, adopted Aug. 26, 1991, provided for the adoption of the Cairo-Whigham-Grady County Comprehensive Land Use Plan. Such plan is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 17-1. - City planning commission—Membership. 
(a)  Number: The city planning commission shall consist of five (5) members, appointed by the governing body. 
(b)  Qualifications: Members of the city planning commission shall be residents of the city, and a majority shall be persons who hold no other public office in the city or county. 
(c)  Term of office: The terms of office of the members of the city planning commission shall be for five (5) years. 
(d)  Vacancies: Any vacancy in the city planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing body. 
(e)  Removal: The governing body may remove any member of the city planning commission for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(f)  Compensation; expenses: All members of the city planning commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-51—2-56) 
Sec. 17-2. - Same—Organization. 
(a)  The city planning commission shall elect one of its appointive members as chairman, who shall serve for one (1) year or until such person is re-elected or a successor is elected. 
(b)  A second appointive member shall be elected as vice-chairman and shall serve for one (1) year or until re-elected or a successor is elected. 
(c)  The city planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality or of the city planning commission. 
(d)  The city planning commission shall promulgate its own rules of procedure. 
(e)  The city planning commission shall determine the times of its meetings. 
(f)  All meetings of the city planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the commission shall be public records. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2-57—2-59) 
Sec. 17-3. - Same—Technical assistance. 
The city planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(Code 1965, § 2-60) 
Sec. 17-4. - Same—Expenditures. 
The expenditures of the city planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing body. 
(Code 1965, § 2-62) 
Sec. 17-5. - City-county planning commission—Appointment of representative; term of office. 
The five (5) representatives for this city on the Cairo-Whigham-Grady County Planning Commission shall be appointed by the governing body of this city, to hold office for terms of three (3) years. 
(Code 1965, § 2-77) 
Sec. 17-6. - Same—Vacancies. 
If a vacancy shall occur in any of the positions on the Cairo-Whigham-Grady County Planning Commission held by representatives of this city, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the governing body of this city for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1965, § 2-78) 
Sec. 17-7. - Same—Removal. 
The five (5) representatives for this city on the Cairo-Whigham-Grady County Planning Commission may be removed at any time for cause, after notice and public hearing. 
(Code 1965, § 2-79) 
Sec. 17-8. - Same—Service without compensation. 
The five (5) representatives for this city on the Cairo-Whigham-Grady County Planning Commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1965, § 2-80) 
Sec. 17-9. - Same—Reimbursement for expenses. 
The five (5) representatives for this city on the Cairo-Whigham-Grady County Planning Commission shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1965, § 2-81) 
Sec. 17-10. - Southwest Georgia Planning and Development Commission—Appointment of representative; term of office. 
The representative of this city on the Southwest Georgia Planning and Development Commission shall be appointed by the governing body of this city to hold office for a term of five (5) years, except that the first appointment under this section shall be for three (3) years. 
(Code 1965, § 2-68) 
Sec. 17-11. - Same—Service without compensation. 
The representative of this city shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1965, § 2-69) 
Sec. 17-12. - Same—Removal. 
The representative of this city may be removed for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing. 
(Code 1965, § 2-70) 
Sec. 17-13. - Same—Vacancies. 
Vacancies in the office of the representative of this city shall be filled by the governing body of this city for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1965, § 2-71) 
Sec. 17-14. - Downtown development authority—Activated. 
There is hereby activated in the city the public body corporate and politic known as the "Downtown Development Authority of the City of Cairo" which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Downtown Development Authorities Law. 
(Res. of 10-11-82) 
State Law reference— Downtown Development Authorities Law, OCGA § 36-42-1 et seq. 
Sec. 17-15. - Same—Directors. 
(a)  The governing body of the city shall appoint the seven (7) members of the board of directors of the downtown development authority, each of whom shall be a taxpayer of the city, and not less than four (4) of whom either have, or represent a party who has, an economic interest in the redevelopment and revitalization of the downtown development area. 
(b)  Each of the persons named above as directors shall serve in staggered terms, two (2) for two (2) years, two (2) for four (4) years and three (3) for six (6) years. After expiration of initial terms, the terms of all directors shall be six (6) years. If at the end of the term of office of any director a successive to such director has not been elected the director whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until a successor is elected. 
(Res. of 10-11-82; Ord. No. 687, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 17-16. - Same—Organization. 
The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the downtown development authorities law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Res. of 10-11-82) 
Sec. 17-17. - Same—Development area. 
The geographical area subject to downtown development authority jurisdiction shall be defined as follows: An area bounded on the north by 3 rd Avenue, east by 3 rd Street, south by 3 rd Avenue, and west by 2 nd Street, together with properties fronting on said streets. 
(Res. of 10-11-82; Ord. No. 687, § 2, 4-28-08) 
Chapter 18 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 18-1. - Installation of pipes, etc. 
(a)  The city manager and any other officer or agent acting for the city shall not engage in the installation, construction, repair, renewal, removal or relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers or other equipment, appliances or other utility in, on, along, over or under any street right-of-way, other than numbered state routes, the construction or improvement of which had been undertaken, agreed to be undertaken, or had been completed by the state highway department pursuant to its authority, without due compliance with the regulations of the state highway department known as PPM 30. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including those franchised by the city, without first securing a permit from the city manager, to install, construct, maintain, repair, renew, remove or relocate any utility facility in, on, along, over or under any city street right-of-way other than numbered state routes where the construction of or improvement on any such street right-of-way had been undertaken, or agreed to be undertaken, or which had been completed by the state highway department pursuant to its authority. 
(c)  The term "utility" as used in this section shall mean and include all publicly, privately, or cooperatively owned lines, facilities and systems for producing, transmitting or distributing communications, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, steam, waste, storm water not connected with highway drainage, and other similar services or commodities, including publicly owned fire and police signals and street lighting systems which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 149, §§ 1—3, 9-8-69) 
Sec. 18-2. - Excavations, encroachments, obstructions of physical activities. 
(a)  No person shall excavate upon or construct any building, wall or extension of or place any obstruction of any kind on any public way of the city. 
(b)  No person shall participate in any game or athletic activity or locate any equipment relating to any game or activity on any street or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1965, § 28-2; Ord. No. 792, § 1, 6-12-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 792, § 1, adopted June 12, 2017, changed the title of § 18-2 from "Excavations; encroachments; obstructions" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Excavation code, § 6-180; plumber work permit, § 13-20. 
Sec. 18-3. - Operation of certain vehicles. 
No person shall operate a motorized or electric cart or vehicle including but not limited to golf carts, go-carts or all-terrain vehicles except upon the following conditions: 
(1)  No such vehicle shall be operated upon the sidewalks of the city. 
(2)  All such vehicles shall be operated on streets and roads only during daylight hours unless such vehicles shall comply with equipment regulations promulgated by the commissioner of public safety. 
(3)  All vehicles shall be operated by persons having a valid motor vehicle operators license. 
(4)  All such vehicles shall be operated in compliance with all traffic laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 3-12-01) 
Chapter 19 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 512, adopted Dec. 14, 1998, enacted new subdivision provisions. Arts. I—XII of such ordinance have been set out herein as a new Ch. 19, §§ 19-1—19-5, 19-6, 19-7—19-15, 19-26—19-31, 19-41—19-44, 19-51—19-61, 19-71—19-83, 19-91—19-100, 19-111—19-118, 19-131—19-135, 19-146—19-148, 19-157, 19-158. For the specific derivation of each section, see the history note following the section. The provisions of Art. XIII, repeal and severability, are not set out herein inasmuch as they are covered in Ch. 1 of this Code; however, it should be noted that § 13.03 provided: 
"Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance and those of other ordinances or statutes apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest or strictest standard shall govern." 
Formerly, Ch. 19 pertained to the same subject matter and was derived from Ch. 29 of the 1965 Code as subsequently amended. See the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume for disposition of amendatory ordinances. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of Cairo, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 1.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-2. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the City of Cairo under the Georgia Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 1.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-3. - Purpose. 
The expressed purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare through the implementation of standards which will: 
(1)  Encourage the development of sound and stable neighborhoods; 
(2)  Assure the provision of adequate streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land development projects; and 
(3)  Ensure orderly community growth and development, supplement and facilitate the provisions in the community's plans, zoning ordinance, official map and capital budget. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 1.03, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-4. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall govern all subdivision of land within the city limits of Cairo, Georgia as now or hereafter established. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 1.04, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-5. - Application and recording fees. 
The city will establish a nonrefundable fee schedule to help cover the costs of administering the subdivision chapter. Such application fees shall be submitted with the preliminary or final plat and, upon acceptance of said plat for review and consideration, shall be deposited into the treasury of the city. Failure to pay such fees as required shall cause the plat to be returned to the applicant without acceptance for review or consideration by the city. In addition, recording fees for plats and restrictive covenants shall be paid by the developer upon approval of the final plat. The city will then submit the plats and covenants for recording in the office of the clerk of superior court. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 1.05, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-6. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated: 
Access: The right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property. 
Accessory structure: Any structure that is a detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with and related to the principal structure or use of land and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. Accessory structure shall include storage buildings, tool houses, pool houses, tree houses, entrance gates to individual homes or subdivisions and other similar uses. Mailboxes shall not be considered accessory structures. 
Alley: A service roadway providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Base flood elevation: Indicates the water surface elevation of the base flood as referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical datum of 1929 or other datum if specified. New or substantially improved, remodeled or damaged properties in the flood zone must build one (1) foot above the BFE. 
Buffer strip: Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
Building official: The official who is employed by the city for the purpose of building inspection, construction codes enforcement, and the administration of all non-health related city building and land development regulations. 
Building line: Building lines are such lines as are established in a plat or by recorded restrictive covenants for the purpose of prohibiting construction of any portion of a building or structure between such line and any easement, right-of-way, or minimum permissible width. This line shall at least coincide with the required setback line. 
City: This shall mean the City of Cairo. 
Collector street: Refers to a street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets or highways, including the principal entrance streets of residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
Commercial subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, any one of which shall contain a gross area less than or equal to twenty-five (25) acres, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of development, sale, or lease of land for commercial and/or office use. 
Commission: Refers to the City Planning Commission. 
Comprehensive plan: Cairo's adopted long-range plan. 
Construction standards: The current edition of printed specifications and standard drawings governing construction within the city as issued by the city clerk. 
Concept plan: A preliminary presentation of a proposed subdivision site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion. 
Cul-de-sac: A local street with only one (1) outlet and having the other end for reversal of traffic movement. 
Dedication: Is the deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general and public uses, reserving to such owner's self no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
Development plan: The Grady County Comprehensive Plan, which may consist of the thoroughfare plan, general land use plan, street and road classification plan, other maps, data and descriptive matter for the physical planned development of Grady County or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto. 
Driveway: A vehicular access way in private ownership, other than a private street, which generally provides access to only one (1) property. 
Easement: A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
Feeder street: See Collector street. 
Final approval: The official action of the city council taken on a subdivision after all conditions, engineering plans, and other requirements have been completed, and the required improvements have been installed, or guarantees posted for their completion. 
Final plat: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision which is presented for final approval. 
Flag lot: A lot fronting on a public road where access to the public road is by a private right-of-way, easement or drive. The lot easement shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width to accommodate a private drive and utility easements. Flag lots are not intended to provide access to other properties so as to circumvent the street and right-of-way requirements of the subdivision regulations. Flag lots are intended to provide access to extremely deep tracts of land for residential purposes. As such, the lot must meet the lot width requirements at the building line. No more than two (2) lots may be served by the same private drive or easement. 
Floodways: The natural channel and the portion of the flood plain along the channel which must be retained solely for the passage of floodwaters to prevent an undue increase in flood heights upstream. Water travels at a high velocity in the floodway. 
Flood hazard area: The channel and relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural stream, river, or body of water subject to flooding during major storm events. Specifically, such designation shall refer to (1) those areas within the city identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as being subject to flooding and delineated on flood insurance rate maps, or (2) particular areas of the city which, based on actual observation of flooding or engineering studies, have been designated as local flood hazard areas by the planning commission. 
Half-street: Refers to a street generally parallel and adjacent to the boundary of a tract, having a lesser right-of-way than required for a full width of the type involved. 
Inverted crown: Refers to roads built with the centerline being the lowest point in the cross section of the road. All storm drainage is routed to the center of the roads where it flows down the roads (the road acts as a ditch). 
Land-disturbing activity: Any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land. 
Lot: An undivided portion of land, which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and identified by a tract number, lot number or symbol on an approved subdivision plat, properly recorded which is or may in the future be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer, or improvement. Also tract or plat or any other area with a similar designation, all mean the same for the purpose of this chapter. 
Existing substandard lot: A lot not meeting the minimum square footage requirement and other development standards. 
Landlocked lot. A lot without the required road frontage which will not meet the access requirements. Landlocked lots may only be accessed by the establishment of a perpetual easement. The easement shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width to accommodate a private drive and utility easements. The lot must meet the lot width requirements at the building line. No more than two (2) lots may be served by the same private drive or easement. 
Outlets: Outlets are parcels of land lying within the boundaries of a platted subdivision but not included as a numbered lot. 
Lot width: The distance between the side lot lines, measured at the building line, and parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
Major arterial: Serves the major traffic movements within urbanized areas, such as between central business districts and outlying residential areas between major intercity communities, or between major suburban centers. Serves a major portion of the trips entering and leaving the urban area, as well as the majority of the through traffic desiring to bypass the central city. Also provides continuity for all rural arterials that intercept the urban area. 
Marginal access street: Is a minor street which is parallel and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from traffic. 
Maintenance guarantee: Any security which may be required and accepted to ensure that necessary improvements will function as required for a specific period of time. 
Minor arterial: Serves trips of moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than principal arterials. Provides access to geographic areas smaller than those served by the higher system. Also provides intracommunity continuity but does not penetrate identifiable neighborhoods. 
Minor street: Is a street which is used primarily for access to abutting property. 
Parkway: Is a street with limited access on an exceptional right-of-way permitting marginal greenway for landscaping. 
Performance bond: Is any security that may be accepted by a municipality to assure that improvements required as part of an application for development will be satisfactorily completed. 
Planned unit development (PUD): A subdivision planned to include open space, and a variety of housing types, which would also permit other land uses, including multifamily structures, churches, schools and commercial activities. 
Planning commission: The planning commission duly appointed by the City of Cairo. 
Pre-application conference: An informal meeting between developers and municipal representatives which affords developers the opportunity to present their plans informally. 
Preliminary plat approval: The conferral of certain rights prior to final plat approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the city council and the applicant. 
Preliminary subdivision plat: A map indicating the proposed layout of a planned development that is submitted for preliminary approval. 
Right-of-way: Is land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley, walkway, drainage facility or other public purpose. 
Setback: The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building, or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps. 
Sight distance: Is the minimum extent of an unobstructed forward vision (in a horizontal plane) along a street from a vehicle located at any given point on a street. 
Sketch plan: Is an informal plan indicating the salient existing features of the site and its surroundings, as described in article II of this chapter, and the general layout of a proposed subdivision. 
Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Five (5) copies of this plan are required to be delivered to the city building official for dispersal to the appropriate reviewers along with a land-disturbing permit application. Approval of the plan by the natural resource conservation services office is required prior to preliminary plat consideration. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Subdivision: Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development and includes all division of land involving or not involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision, recombination and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing. There are two (2) types of subdivisions, major and minor, both having separate administrative and approval processes. 
Subdivision, major: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into five (5) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and all subdivisions involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision. 
Subdivision, minor: The subdivision of a tract of land into not more than four (4) lots in which there are no roadway, drainage or other required improvements; where each lot has frontage on a public street, where there is adequate provision for potable water supply and waste water management for each lot and where the resultant lots comply with the standards of this chapter and includes the following: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the subdivision regulations and the zoning ordinance. 
Subdivider: The person, firm or corporation having such proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this chapter. 
Street: Means, relates to, and includes, streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, lanes, alleys and other ways. 
(1)  Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic and includes all federal, state and paved county roads. 
(2)  Major arterials are streets with access control, channelized intersections, restricted parking, and which collects and distributes traffic to and from minor arterials. 
(3)  Minor arterials serve trips of moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than principal arterials; provide access to geographic areas smaller than those served by the higher system; also provides intracommunity continuity but does not penetrate identifiable neighborhoods. 
(4)  Collector or feeder streets are those which carry traffic from minor or access streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways and promise a traffic potential greater than that of minor streets. 
(5)  Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(6)  Cul-de-sacs are streets with a single common ingress and egress. 
(7)  Dead end streets are those streets with only one (1) end open to vehicular traffic and not provided with a vehicle turn-around at the other end. 
(8)  Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Usable area: The net usable portion of a lot, tract, or stand, not including any additional property within the legal boundaries of the parcel which by virtue of permanent or seasonal inundation by surface water, crossing by rights-of-way or easements, steep slopes, and the like, is not suitable for the construction of habitable structures or drain fields. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Zoning ordinance: Refers to the City of Cairo's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 2.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-7. - Plats required. 
After the effective date of this chapter or revisions thereof, no person shall commence public improvements on subdivided land within the legal jurisdiction of Cairo, prior to the approval of the preliminary plat of such land in accordance with the provisions hereof. No real property within the legal jurisdiction of Cairo shall be divided and offered for sale until a final plat thereof is approved by the city council and recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof. No construction on such lots shall commence prior to the approval of the final plat. In the case where a subdivision improvement agreement is in effect, no construction on such lots shall commence prior to the certification by the city engineer that improvements are adequate to meet the city standards. 
All preliminary and final plats shall bear the seal of a surveyor or engineer registered in the State of Georgia in order to verify the standards followed and accuracy of the plat. 
Building permits shall not be issued for structures located in a subdivision created subsequent to the adoption of this chapter unless a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded as provided herein. 
In the event that no improvements are made to land approved for subdivision within one (1) year, the re-submittal of the preliminary plat shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-8. - Conformance to standards for public health and environmental protection. 
The developer, in so far as such regulations may pertain to his or her particular project, is responsible for meeting all applicable federal, state, and county regulations concerning the provision of safe drinking water, sewage treatment, erosion and sedimentation control, and impacts on wetlands and waters of the state. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-9. - Conformance to standards for streets, utilities and other infrastructure. 
All roads, streets, alleys, utilities and other required infrastructure that are to be used by the general public shall be constructed in accordance with the standards fixed by this chapter or other applicable city standards. No improvements shall be accepted for city maintenance unless the provisions of this chapter have been met. Official approval of a developer's plan constitutes no implied responsibility on the city for any assistance in construction, either in materials or labor or equipment, this being the responsibility of the developer unless otherwise agreed to by written authorization of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.03, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-10. - Erection of buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot within the legal jurisdiction of Cairo unless the street giving access thereto has been accepted as a public street in accordance with this chapter, or unless such street had attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this chapter, or on a street accepted by the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.04, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-11. - Public street access. 
No sale of lots, or building on any lot within Cairo shall be allowed unless the street giving access thereto has been accepted as a public street, or unless such street has obtained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.05, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-12. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use or any other use that will continue to increase the danger to health, safety or proper construction unless hazards can be and are corrected. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.06, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-13. - Hardship variances. 
Where the city council finds that because of topographic or other conditions peculiar to the site, literal enforcement of a revision of this chapter may result, in an individual case, in unnecessary hardship to the developer, it may vary the regulations where, in the opinion of the city council such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. Any variance shall be recorded in the minutes of the city council meeting together with the reasoning used to justify it. In granting variances and modifications, the city council may require such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied and modified. Recommendations for hardship variances by the planning commission shall be subject to the approval of the Cairo City Council. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.07, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-14. - House numbers/street addresses. 
House numbers shall be assigned and street addresses shall be assigned by the building official after preliminary plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.08, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-15. - Street, easements, alleys, etc. 
The approval of final plat by the city council and its subsequent recording does not constitute acceptance by the city of any street, easement, alley or other grounds shown on the plat. This will be done by dedication and by acceptance resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 3.09, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-16—19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 19-26. - Improvements and subdivision improvement agreement (SIA). 
(a)  Procedure: A subdivision improvement agreement may be utilized to expedite the subdivision approval process. Upon approval of the preliminary plat of a major subdivision, the developer may submit a final plat along with a subdivision improvement agreement to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council. The planning commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council within forty-five (45) days or shall be determined to be approved if no recommendation has been forwarded in this time period. Upon approval of the final plat and formal acceptance of the service improvement agreement by the city council, the final plat will be recorded and the subdivided lots may be sold. 
(b)  Completion of improvements: Before the final subdivision plat is signed by the mayor of the city council, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the city council's decision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer, all the street, sanitary and other public improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required in this chapter, specified in the final subdivision plat and as approved by the city council, and to dedicate those public improvements to the City of Cairo, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements. 
(c)  Subdivision improvement agreement and performance guarantee: 
(1)  Agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement shall consist of both a performance bond and a maintenance bond. The city council in its sole discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approval of the final subdivision plat. As an alternative, the city council may permit the applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement by which the subdivider posts both a performance and a maintenance security with the City of Cairo and covenants to complete all required public improvements no later than one (1) year following the date on which the mayor signs the final subdivision plat on behalf of the city council. The applicant shall covenant to maintain each required public improvement for a period of two (2) years following the date that the city engineer certifies that all improvements have been satisfactorily installed and also shall warrant that all required public improvements will be free from defect for a period of two (2) years following the certification by the city engineer that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. The subdivision improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and conditions agreed to by the applicant and the city council. 
(2)  Covenants to run. The subdivision improvement agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in the agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the subdivider. The subdivision improvement agreement will be adopted by the city council, and when necessary, the city council, pursuant to applicable state and local laws and shall be recorded in the clerk and recorder's office of Grady County. 
(3)  Performance security. Whenever the city council permits an applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement, it shall require the applicant to provide an irrevocable letter of credit bond or cash escrow as a performance security for the promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement. Either security shall be in an amount equal to one hundred twenty (120) percent of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements, including lot improvements. The issuer of the bond letter of credit or the escrow agent, as applicable, shall be acceptable to the city council. 
a.  Letter of credit. If the applicant posts a letter of credit as security for its promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement, the credit shall (1) be irrevocable; (2) be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods in subsection (c)(1); and (3) require only that the government present the credit with a sight draft and an affidavit signed by the city attorney attesting to the municipality's right to draw funds under the credit. 
b.  Cash escrow. If the applicant posts a cash escrow as security for its promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement, the escrow instructions shall provide: (1) That the subdivider will have no right to a return of any of the funds except as provided in section 19-27(b)(2); and (2) that the escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to the municipality whenever the city attorney presents an affidavit to the agent attesting to the municipality's right to receive funds whether or not the subdivider protests that right. If and when the applicant completes the required improvements in accordance with the municipality's construction standards and specifications, the performance security will be returned to the applicant. 
(d)  Temporary improvement. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the city council and shall maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by the city council. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the local government a separate subdivision improvement agreement and a letter of credit or cash escrow in an appropriate amount for temporary facilities, which agreement and credit or escrow shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. 
(e)  Costs of improvement. All required improvements shall be made by the developer, at its expense, without reimbursement by the City of Cairo unless otherwise authorized in writing by the city council. 
(f)  Governmental units. Governmental units to which these contract and security provisions apply may file, in lieu of the contract and security, a certified resolution or chapter from officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Failure to complete improvement. For subdivisions for which no subdivision improvement agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the period specified by the city council in the resolution approving the plat, the sketch plat or preliminary plat approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a subdivision improvement agreement has been executed and security has been posted and required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the City of Cairo may then: (1) declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; (2) obtain funds under the security and complete improvements itself or through a third party; (3) assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner's promise to complete improvements in the subdivision; (4) exercise any other rights available under the law. 
(h)  Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by chapter of the city council. The approval of a subdivision plat by the city council, whether sketch, preliminary or final, shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or park shown on plat. The city council shall require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 4.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-27. - Inspection of improvements. 
(a)  General procedure and fees. The city council shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the municipality an inspection fee based on the estimated cost of inspection, and where the improvements are completed prior to final plat approval, the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the mayor of the City of Cairo unless the inspection fee has been paid at the time of application. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the municipality and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the city engineer finds upon inspection that any one (1) or more of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the municipality's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for property completing the improvements. 
(b)  Release or reduction of performance bond. 
(1)  Certificate of satisfactory completion. The city council shall not release nor reduce the amount of any performance bond posted by the subdivider until the city engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until (i) the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the city engineer, through submission of a detailed "as-built" survey plat of the subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the City of Cairo, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision, and (ii) a title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the city engineer, and city attorney. 
(2)  Reduction of escrowed funds and performance security. If the performance security posted by the subdivider was a cash escrow, the amount of that escrow shall be released to the subdivider after the city engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. Funds held in the escrow account shall not be released to the subdivider, in whole or in part, except upon express written instructions of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 4.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-28. - Maintenance of improvements. 
(a)  The developer shall be required to maintain all required public improvements on the individual subdivided lots for the entirety of the maintenance period. The City of Cairo shall require that the applicant post a maintenance security to insure the maintenance of such improvements. If there are any certificates of occupancy on a street not dedicated to the City of Cairo, the city may on twelve (12) hours' notice effect emergency repairs and charge those costs to the developer. Following the acceptance of the dedication of any public improvement by the city, the city may, in its sole discretion require the subdivider to maintain the improvement for a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance. If a subdivision improvement agreement is in place, the city may require the subdivider to maintain the improvement for a period of two (2) years from the date that the city engineer certifies that the required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
(b)  At the end of the maintenance and warranty periods, all escrowed funds, if any, shall be released to the subdivider. If the maintenance security provided by the subdivider was a letter of credit, the city attorney shall execute waivers of the municipality's right to draw funds under the credit, after the expiration of the maintenance period. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 4.03, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-29. - Deferral or waiver of required improvements. 
(a)  The city council may defer or waive at the time of final approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all public improvements as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of the inadequacy or in existence of connecting facilities. Any determination to defer or waive the provision of any public improvement must be made on the record and the reasons for the deferral or waiver also shall be expressly made on the record. 
(b)  Whenever it is deemed necessary by the city council to defer the construction of any improvement required under this chapter because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or nonexistent connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the city prior to signing of the final subdivision plat by the mayor of the city, or the developer may execute a separate subdivision improvement agreement secured by a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the deferred improvements upon demand of the city. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 4.04, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-30. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  When a subdivision improvement agreement and security have been required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the required public improvements or posting of a performance security adequate to cover remaining work and certification by the city engineer that the appropriate improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
(b)  Under an SIA, the extent of street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant(s) and by police and fire equipment prior to the issuance of a building permit. The developer shall, at the time of the offer of dedication, submit moneys in escrow to the city in a sum determined by the city engineer for the necessary final improvement of the street. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 4.05, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-31. - Consumer protection legislation and conflicts of interest statutes. 
(a)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be granted or issued if a developer or its authorized agent has violated any federal, state or local law pertaining to (1) consumer protection; or (2) real estate land sales, promotion, or practices; or (3) any applicable conflicts-of-interest legislation with respect to the lot or parcel of land which is the subject of the permit or certificate until a court of competent jurisdiction so orders. 
(b)  With respect to any lot or parcel of land described in the immediately preceding section, if a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been granted or issued, it may be revoked by the municipality until a court of competent jurisdiction orders otherwise, provided that in no event shall the rights of intervening innocent third parties in possession of a certificate of occupancy be prejudiced by any such revocation. 
(c)  Any violation of a federal, state, or local consumer protection law, including, but not limited to: Postal Reorganization Act of 1970; Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act; the Truth in Lending Act; the Uniform Commercial Credit Code; state "Blue Sky" laws; state subdivision disclosure acts, or any conflicts of interest statute, law, or chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject to the appropriate penalties and proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 4.06, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-32—19-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRE-DEVELOPMENT REVIEW 

Sec. 19-41. - Pre-development review. 
Prior to the filing of an application for the approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider or his engineer shall consult with the building official to determine existing conditions within the site and its vicinity. The subdivider or his engineer shall review his proposed methods of sewage disposal, drainage, street improvements, and source of water for the proposed subdivision with the city building official, health department, public works director, city engineer and other appropriate officials for the purpose of facilitating the review process. Should the project front a state highway, the developer should begin the early review process with the Georgia Department of Transportation as quickly as possible. 
The subdivider shall prepare and present a plan for sewage treatment prior to proceeding further with the preparation of plans or improvements for the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 5.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-42. - Required sketch plan for pre-development review. 
It is recommended that a sketch plan of the proposed development be submitted at the pre-development review meeting. A sketch plan shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions—the sketch plan may be a free-hand pencil sketch made directly on a print of the boundary survey. As far as may be practicable on the basis of a sketch, the designated staff shall advise the subdivider of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms to the standards of this chapter and other applicable chapters or statutes. In addition, the staff will advise the subdivider of other applicable requirements relating to soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements, and DOT access requirements, etc. The sketch plan shall identify the following items: 
(1)  Type of development, i.e. residential, commercial, etc.; 
(2)  Approximate tract boundaries and total acreage; 
(3)  Proposed lot layout and approximate number of lots; 
(4)  Streets on and adjacent to the tract and proposed general street layout; 
(5)  Land characteristics including drainage patterns, marginal lands; and 
(6)  Available community facilities and utilities; 
(7)  Proposed utilities and street improvements; and 
(8)  Proposed protective covenants. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 5.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-43. - Soil and sedimentation review process. 
The applicant is encouraged to meet with the Natural Resource Conservation Service Office (NRCS), Flint River District, with a rough draft or sketch plan of the proposed subdivision prior to submitting an application and preliminary plat. Although this step is not a requirement, it is helpful to aid these officials in advising the developer if a soil and sedimentation control plan is necessary. 
If a proposed new subdivision will have new roads or drainage improvements or entails a significant amount of land-disturbing activity, the developer must submit a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to plat approval. Five (5) copies of the soil erosion and sedimentation plan as well as a land-disturbing permit application will need to be delivered to the city building official to be dispensed to the health official, director of public works and the Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) district office (formerly the Soil Conservation Service) for review. The review process may take up to forty-five (45) days from the date the plan is submitted. No land disturbing, i.e. road building, land clearing, drainage installation, etc. shall be performed until the preliminary plat has been approved, signed and land-disturbing permits issued. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 5.03, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-44. - Georgia Department of Transportation Review. 
Any subdivision located on a state highway must submit three (3) copies of preliminary plat to the Georgia DOT for review. A letter of recommendation from DOT should be presented with the submittal of the preliminary plat. 
A subdivision application and preliminary plat should be presented at the same time that the soil and sedimentation control plan is submitted. No subdivision application will be placed on the agenda for the planning commission meeting until an approved soil and sedimentation control plan and land-disturbing permit is received with the application. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 5.04, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-45—19-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MAJOR SUBDIVISION 
DIVISION 1. - PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 19-51. - General procedures. 
Any person desiring to subdivide land shall file with the city building official the appropriate copies of the preliminary plat, which will be accompanied by a formal application, for distribution to appropriate departments and agencies. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter and to city specifications by a registered engineer, surveyor, or architect who is licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
After the registered land surveyor has completed the preliminary plat, per the development regulations, the developer must complete a subdivision application and present one (1) original mylar and seven (7) copies of the preliminary plat to the building official along with the appropriate fee per lot. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-52. - Filing. 
The preliminary plat shall be deemed filed with the city planning commission when it is filed with the city building official or other designated official. Plats must be filed at least ten (10) days before the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission in order to be included on its agenda for review. The planning commission's regular meeting date is the third Tuesday of each month. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-53. - Fees. 
The subdivider, at the time application is made for preliminary plat review, shall pay unto the city the appropriate fees as set by the city council. These fees shall be used to defray the city's cost of researching subdivision plats, including investigation of sanitary conditions, street construction and other detailed investigations of plats by city officials. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.03, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-54. - Distribution and review. 
Six (6) copies of the preliminary plat shall be distributed by the building official to the planning commission, the city clerk, the Grady County Department of Health, the city manager, city engineer and the Southwest Georgia RDC for review and recommendation to the planning commission. One (1) copy will be held for corrections and returned to the subdivider after it has been reviewed. Prior to the planning commission meeting, the county health department (if applicable), and the RDC will submit, in writing, copies of their recommendations to the city planning commission. Where the proposed development meets its requirements, the department of health shall so certify its conceptual approval of the development on one (1) or more copies of the preliminary plat as specified below. Recommendations from other agencies and departments may also be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.04, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-55. - Recommendation by the planning commission. 
The planning commission will review the subdivision plat and make a recommendation to approve or disapprove the plat to the city council. The recommendation of approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be accomplished within forty-five (45) days after the date of the regularly scheduled planning commission meeting following submission of the application. If, after the forty-five (45) days, the planning commission has failed to render a recommendation, the recommendation on the preliminary plat shall be deemed as an approval by the planning commission and on demand, a copy shall be forwarded to the city council for review by the mayor and city council, provided that the subdivider may waive in writing this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. If the planning commission recommends denial of the preliminary plat, the reasons shall be so stated in the resolution and the subdivider shall be so advised. Upon a positive recommendation of a plat, the plat shall be forwarded to the city council for formal approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.05, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-56. - Approval/disapproval by the city council. 
If the city council approves a preliminary plat, the developer must take the signed original and have four (4) copies made to be delivered back to the building official. If the city council does not approve the plat, the reasons for denial shall be so stated in writing and mailed to the developer for correction. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.06, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-57. - Effect of preliminary plat approval. 
Preliminary plat approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a one (1) year period from the date of the preliminary approval: 
(1)  That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed; 
(2)  The applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or sections of the preliminary subdivision plat; and 
(3)  The applicant may apply for and the city council may grant an extension on such preliminary approval for a specified time period. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.07, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-58. - Preliminary platting requirements. 
The preliminary plat may be of approximate accuracy within one- tenth ( 1/10 ) foot and of a legible scale, made directly on a print of a boundary survey. 
The plat will include the following information: 
(1)  Preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, and shall show the following: 
a.  Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and total acres. 
b.  Name of owner of subdivision or his authorized agent, if any. 
c.  Name of the registered professional engineer or surveyor responsible for the plat with date of survey indicated. 
d.  The names of all owners and zoning of all land adjacent to the proposed subdivision and the names of the adjacent subdivisions. 
e.  A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two (2) miles showing the location of the proposed subdivision. 
f.  Street names, rights-of-way and roadway width; similar data for alleys, if any. 
g.  Location of utilities, and other types of easements. 
h.  Lot lines, lot and block numbers (consecutively numbered or lettered), lot sizes, area in parks, etc. 
i.  Topographic maps of all land subdivided, with a two (2) foot scale contour interval, or where deemed appropriate by the city council (prior to preliminary plat submittal), a one (1) foot contour interval. 
j.  Minimum building setback lines. 
k.  Numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, date. 
l.  All elevations shall be based on sea level datum as determined from geodetic control monuments or U.S. Geological Survey 7½ min. quad sheets. A statement on the plat shall indicate which standard is utilized. 
m.  Delineation of all areas of the proposed subdivisions which lie within established Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodplains and/or state jurisdictional wetlands. The floodplain map number and panel as well as the type of flood zone should be inscribed on the plat if a property is located in a flood zone. 
n.  Soil characteristics. Where the proposed subdivision is not to be served by a public or community sewage system, information on soil types and capabilities, frequency and evaluation of seasonal high groundwater tables, and occurrence of rock and other impervious strata shall be provided by the developer. This information should be superimposed on a copy of the plat showing contour lines and other natural features of the site. The frontage requirements for lots without water/and or sewer in Grady County is one hundred (100) feet. 
o.  Location of all existing buildings of the proposed subdivision and all existing sewers, water mains, culverts, fire hydrants, underground or aboveground utilities on or adjacent to the proposed subdivision and the location of all water supplies on or off the subdivision which will bear upon the location of the on-site sewage management systems. The location of any wells located on adjoining land within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property line should be identified on the plat. 
p.  All existing watercourses, drainage ditches, canals and bodies of water on or adjacent to proposed subdivision. 
q.  Plans for stormwater management, including the proposed location of drainage ways, basins, and other improvements. 
r.  A copy of a Natural Resource and Conservation Service (NRCS) approved land-disturbing permit and a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation if required. 
s.  Draft of proposed restrictive covenants, if any, and designation of areas subject to special restrictions. 
t.  Add note "NOT FOR RECORDING" to be affixed on preliminary plat. 
u.  A letter of recommendation from DOT should be presented to the planning commission prior to preliminary plat approval if the property accesses a state highway. 
v.  Appropriate certificates for the signatures of the planning commission chairman, mayor and council, the city manager, the owner, and the Grady County Health Department. 
w.  Where the proposed plat covers only a portion of the subdivider's entire holding, sketch shall be submitted showing the prospective street layout and proposed use for the remainder. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.08, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-59. - Review and approval by the Grady County Department of Health. 
Grady County Department of Health shall review the proposed subdivision for conformance with all applicable health and environmental standards falling within its regulatory jurisdiction. 
(1)  Individual water or on site sewage disposal systems: If, in its judgment, the subdivision, or phase of the subdivision submitted for review, will meet the requirements of chapter 290-5-26 and Rule III Addendum, the following shall be inscribed on (i) a copy of the preliminary plat showing the characteristics of soils found within the boundaries of the development, and (ii) an original signed copy of the preliminary plat for transmittal to the planning commission: 
GRADY COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
Based on soils and associated information provided by the developer and an on-site inspection, this proposed subdivision has been approved as to its general suitability for the installation of on-site sewerage disposal systems, with any exceptions as noted. Final approval for individual installations can be given only if systems are built according to this Department's Regulations. This preliminary plat was given approval by the ____________ County Department of Public Health on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________  County Environmental Health  Specialist 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.09, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-60. - Certificates of preliminary plat approval. 
At such time as the preliminary plat may be recommended for approval by the planning commission, city manager and approved by the city council, a certificate of approval shall be inscribed for signature on the plat provided that it has received the required certification by the county health department. 
(1)  Certificate by the planning commission: Upon recommendation for approval by the planning commission, or after the required forty-five (45) days in which the commission has failed to act on a request for approval, the chairman of the commission shall inscribe on the plat the following: 
City of Cairo   Recommendation of Preliminary Plat Approval   by the Cairo Planning Commission 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Cairo, Georgia, all the requirements for approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was recommended for approval by the Cairo Planning Commission on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________ ____________  Chairman-Planning-Commission 
(2)  Certificate by the city manager: Upon approval by the city manager, the city manager shall inscribe on the plat the following: 
City of Cairo   Recommendation of Preliminary Plat Approval   by the Cairo City Manager 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Cairo, Georgia, all the requirements for approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was recommended for approval by the Cairo City Manager on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________  City Manager 
(3)  Certificate by the city council: 
City of Cairo   Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval   by the Mayor and city council 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Cairo, Georgia, all the requirements for approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was approved by the Cairo Mayor and city council on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . This recommendation of approval does not constitute approval of a Final Plat. This Certificate of Approval shall expire and become null and void on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ , one (1) year from the above date of approval. 
Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
____________  Mayor, City of Cairo 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.10, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-61. - Construction of major subdivision improvements. 
Construction of the subdivision improvements may commence only after the approval of the preliminary plat by the Cairo City Council. The developer shall arrange periodic inspections of the project by the appropriate city departments during the course of construction. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 6.11, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-62—19-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 19-71. - Time limits, phasing, sale of lots, recording. 
The subdivider shall have up to one (1) year after approval of the preliminary plat in which to make required improvements and to submit a final plat. The final plat shall substantially conform with the approved preliminary plat. If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may constitute only that portion (phasing) of the preliminary plat he proposes to record and develop at that time. However, no sale of lots or construction on any individual lot shall begin until after approval of the final plat by the city council and its recording in Grady County Superior Court. Two (2) processes may be followed for final plat approval including the following: 
(1)  Final plat approval following construction of improvements. Upon preliminary plat approval, the developer may initiate design and construction of major subdivision improvements. Upon completion of the improvements, the developer may submit a copy of the final plat depicting the subdivision as built for recommendation to the planning commission. The planning commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council within forty-five (45) days or shall be determined to be approved if no recommendation has been forwarded in this time period. Upon formal acceptance/approval of the city council, the plat shall be recorded and the sales of individual lots can begin. 
(2)  Final plat approval with service improvement agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement may be utilized to expedite the subdivision approval process. Upon approval of the preliminary plat of a major subdivision, the developer may submit a final plat along with a subdivision improvement agreement to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council. The planning commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council within forty-five (45) days or shall be determined to be approved if no recommendation has been forwarded in this time period. Upon approval of the final plat and formal acceptance of the service improvement agreement by the city council, the final plat will be recorded and the subdivided lots may be sold while the improvements are being constructed by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-72. - Filing fee. 
A final plat application filing fee shall be paid by the developer at the time of submittal of the final plat. The fee shall be at the rate of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the first page and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional page or as set from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-73. - Final subdivision with no land-disturbing permit. 
If the new subdivision has no new roads, drainage improvements or land disturbing activities, the final plat as completed by the registered land surveyor may be submitted to the building official, according to city regulations. One (1) original on linen or mylar and twelve (12) copies must be submitted two (2) weeks prior to the regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.03, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-74. - Final plat with land-disturbing permit. 
If the new subdivision has new roads or drainage improvements or substantial land disturbing activity, the final plat must be submitted reflecting the subdivision with the new roads or improvements as they are built. The mayor and council must also approve the final plat. No plat is deemed approved until all easements and roads have been accepted. When there is a subdivision improvement agreement, performance and maintenance securities must be posted and the city must accept the improvements prior to the approval of the final plat. When there is no subdivision improvement agreement, the developer must put up the specified maintenance security at the time that the roads and the final plat are approved. 
The developer remains responsible for the maintenance and repairs on the road for a period of two (2) years from the time the final plat is approved. After two (2) years, the building official or other designated official will re-inspect the road. If the road is accepted as is, maintenance security will be released. If the road is not accepted, the developer will be responsible for making the required repairs, etc., or the maintenance security will be forfeited. If there is a subdivision improvement agreement, the developer is responsible for the maintenance and repairs on the road for a period of two (2) years from the time the city manager certifies the satisfactory completion of the required improvements. Prior to final plat approval, the appropriate road sign fees shall be paid to the city clerk by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.04, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-75. - Approved final plat. 
Once the planning commission recommends approval of a final plat, the plat is submitted to the city council for approval. Upon the city council's approval, the proper signatures will be affixed to the plat, the city will collect recording fees from the developer and shall be responsible for recording the plat in the clerk of superior court's office in Grady County. Only after the plat is recorded in the clerk of superior court's office in Grady County, may the developer begin to sell the lots. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.05, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-76. - Denial of final plat. 
If the final plat is denied the developer will be notified of any modifications or problems which need to be addressed. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.06, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-77. - Filing. 
Following approval of the preliminary plat the developer may complete all improvements and then file with the building official an application for final plat approval or file a subdivision improvement agreement as well as an application for final plat with the building official. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.07, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-78. - Application requirements. 
The application shall contain: 
(1)  A letter of application containing the name and address of a person to whom notice may be sent. 
(2)  A complete list of deviations, if any, from that which appeared on the approved preliminary plat. 
(3)  A certified copy of all private covenants or deed restrictions, if any, pertaining to land within the subdivision. 
(4)  A copy of the agreement between the subdivider and any other political jurisdiction, if any, regarding the arrangements for providing the necessary water and sewer facilities. 
(5)  Evidence of the posting of a required performance bond, as required in section 19-26, to insure the construction and installation of required public facilities and improvements. 
(6)  The original reproducible on plastic or linen and four (4) prints of the final plat. 
(7)  Design and calculations for the stormwater drainage system, including elevations and capacities of pipes and holding basins. This plan shall be designed so as to meet all applicable state and federal requirements. 
(8)  A plan showing the location of all water, sewer, gas, and electrical system improvements, including locations of service connections. 
(9)  If the proposed water/sewerage for a subdivision requires the approval of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, the approval shall be obtained prior to making application for approval of the final plat. The approval shall be in writing and transmitted to the city council. 
(10)  All as-built plans indicating permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, storm drainage facilities, and public utilities. Copies of these plans shall be provided to the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.08, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-79. - Approval by the planning commission. 
The recommendation of approval or disapproval of the final plat by the planning commission shall be accomplished within forty-five (45) days after the date of the scheduled regular planning commission meeting following submission of the application. If, after the forty-five (45) days, the planning commission has failed to act, the final plat shall be deemed approved and on demand, a copy shall be signed for transmission to the city council, provided, that the subdivider may waive in writing this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. If the planning commission disapproves the final plat, the reasons shall be stated in the resolution and the subdivider shall be so advised. Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance by the City of Cairo for the dedication of any streets or public way or ground for public use or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.09, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-80. - Approval by the mayor and council. 
If the planning commission recommends approval of the final plat, the final plat shall be submitted to the city council for review. The city council shall act upon the final plat within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the final plat. If, the city council disapproves the final plat, the reasons shall be stated in the resolution and the subdivider shall be so advised. 
At the time a final plat is approved, the terms under which the city will accept maintenance of streets, drainage systems, and sewerage systems will be provided to the developer. When all conditions have been met, city council shall then pass appropriate resolutions authorizing the acceptance of improvements and their maintenance and shall authorize the mayor to sign a certificate on the final plat denoting city approval. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.10, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-81. - Final plat requirements. 
The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat and requirements therefore, as set forth in this chapter and shall be drawn in permanent ink on one (1) or more sheets of reproducible plastic measuring eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches maximum. 
(1)  The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink or tracing cloth to a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. Individual sheets shall not be larger than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches overall, as approved by the county for purposes of recording. Where the final sheet of a proposed subdivision requires more than one (1) sheet, each sheet shall be keyed to a master map with appropriate marks of identification. 
(2)  The final plat shall include the following information: 
a.  Primary control points and benchmarks with necessary descriptions and locations of such control points, including all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data necessary for proper locations. 
b.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other right-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, and area and central angle of all curves. 
c.  Names and right-of-way of each street or other right-of-way. 
d.  Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements. 
e.  Number or letter to identify each lot. Lots shall be numbered in numerical order beginning with number one (1) in each block, and blocks lettered in alphabetical order. 
f.  A street address (house number) for each building lot to be assigned by the city building official. 
g.  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
h.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
i.  Location and description of monuments. 
j.  Name of owners and zoning of adjacent land. 
k.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by recorded names, date, and number. 
l.  Certification by registered surveyor or registered engineer to accuracy of survey and plat with date of survey indicated. 
m.  Declaration of land ownership. 
n.  Title, numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, total project acreage, and date. 
o.  A vicinity map, shown either as an insert or on a separate sheet and at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two (2) miles, showing the location of the proposed subdivision. 
p.  Flood hazard zones or the lack of shall be identified and delineated or stated on the plat. 
q.  Topographic contour lines at two (2) foot contour intervals. 
r.  A statement of private covenants, if any, to be put directly on the plat if they are brief enough; otherwise, if covenants are separately recorded, a statement as follows: 
This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were recorded in record book ____________ , page number ____________ , and signed by the owner. 
s.  Separate instrument shall be attached to and made a part of all plats showing the grade of all roads, streets, alleys and other rights-of-way however designated and the elevations of the several portions of the land included on the plat, by contour lines at two (2) foot intervals. 
t.  A statement by the owner, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public uses, similar to the following: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE AND DECLARATION CAIRO, GEORGIA 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, drains, easements and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown for the purposes therein expressed. Dated this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
By: ____________     Owner 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.11, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 688, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 19-82. - Certificates of final plat approval. 
At such time as the final plat may be recommended for approval by the planning commission, and subsequently, approved by the city council, a certificate of approval shall be inscribed on the plat to indicate such approval by these bodies. 
(1)  Certification by the planning commission: Upon approval by the planning commission, or after the required forty-five (45) days in which the commission has failed to act on a request for approval, the chairman of the commission shall inscribe on the plat the following: 
FINAL PLAT   RECOMMENDATION OF APPROVAL   BY CAIRO PLANNING COMMISSION 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of Cairo, Georgia, all the requirements for approval having been fulfilled, this Final Plat was recommended for approval by the Cairo Planning Commission on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ ____________  Chairman-Cairo Planning  Commission 
(2)  Certification of the final plat by the mayor and council: Upon approval by the Cairo City Council, the mayor shall sign the following plat inscription: 
FINAL PLAT   APPROVAL BY THE CAIRO CITY COUNCIL 
All requirements for approval having been fulfilled and approval having been made by the Cairo Planning Commission, this Final Plat was given approval by the Cairo City Council and all public roadways and easements shown hereon are hereby accepted this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 19 ____________ . 
____________ ____________  Mayor, City of Cairo 
(3)  Certificate of final plat approval by the Grady County Health Department: 
An on-site inspection indicates that the installation of water wells or individual sewage disposal systems on this subdivision have been completed according to the Grady County Health Department's regulations. This Final Plat was given approval by the Grady County Department of Public Health on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 
____________ ____________  Grady County Environmental  Health Specialist 
(Ord. No. 512, § 7.12, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-83—19-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINOR, ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES AND PLATTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 19-91. - Criteria. 
Criteria for filing for a minor administrative subdivision: In order to file for a minor administrative subdivision the subdivision must meet all of the following requirements. 
(1)  The subdivision must qualify as a minor administrative subdivision. 
(2)  The smallest lot in the subdivision must meet the requirements of the Cairo Zoning Ordinance requirements and the Grady County Department of Health standards. 
(3)  The lot proposed to be subdivided is not part of previous subdivision approved within the three years prior to this application. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-92. - Filing. 
The developer shall file with the building official an application for administrative subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-93. - Fees. 
At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall pay a fee as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.03, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-94. - Application requirements. 
The application shall include: 
(1)  An application on the appropriate prescribed form; 
(2)  A certified copy of all private covenants or deed restrictions, if any, pertaining to land within the subdivision; 
(3)  Information relating to the characteristics of soils within the subdivision if city water and/or sewer is to be provided by individual well or septic tank; 
(4)  An original reproducible on plastic or linen and four (4) copies of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.04, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-95. - Review and approvals. 
The review and or approval of administrative subdivisions shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Copies of the plats shall be distributed to the Grady County Health Department (if applicable), the planning commission, and the city manager or his designee for approval. 
(2)  Approval or disapproval of the administrative plat shall be accomplished by the city manager and health department within fifteen (15) working days after the date of the application. If, after the fifteen (15) days the city manager has failed to act, the final plat shall be deemed approved subject to the approval of the Grady County Health Department and on demand, a copy shall be signed by the city manager, planning and commission chairman, provided, that the subdivider may waive in writing this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. If the city manager or his designee disapproves the final plat, the reasons shall be stated in writing and the subdivider shall be so advised. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.05, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-96. - Review by county health department. 
The proposed administrative subdivision shall be reviewed and if approved, certified by the Grady County Public Health Department if individual water wells and/or private sewage systems will be used. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.06, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-97. - Certificate of approval by the city manager and planning commission. 
Upon approval by the city manager, the planning commission and the city manager shall sign an approval certificate which shall have been inscribed on the plat by the developer of the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.07, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-98. - Recording of plat. 
The approved and certified plat shall be recorded by the City of Cairo after recording fees have been posted by the developer as required. Approval of the city council shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.08, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-99. - Building and lot sales. 
No building on lots or sale of lots shall take place before the approved and certified plat is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.09, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-100. - Combined preliminary/final plat requirements. 
The final plat shall contain the following: 
(1)  Primary control points and benchmarks with necessary descriptions and locations of such control points, including all dimensions, angle, bearings, and similar data necessary for proper locations. 
(2)  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other right-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, and area and central angle of all curves. 
(3)  Names and right-of-way of each street or other right-of-way. 
(4)  Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements. 
(5)  Number or letter to identify each lot. 
(6)  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
(7)  Minimum building set-back lines on all lots and other sites and delineate areas that are subject to ponding of water or within the FIRM floodplain areas. Topo contour intervals of the area shall be shown at two (2) foot contour intervals. 
(8)  Location and description of monuments. 
(9)  Names of owners and zoning of adjoining land. 
(10)  Reference to recorded subdivision plats or adjoining platted land by recorded names, date, and number. 
(11)  Certification by registered surveyor or registered engineer as to accuracy of survey and plat with date of survey indicated. 
(12)  Declaration of land ownership. 
(13)  Title, numerical scale, graphic scale, north arrow, total project acreage, and date. 
(14)  A vicinity map, shown either as an insert or on a separate sheet and at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two (2) miles, showing the location of the proposed subdivision. 
(15)  A statement of private covenants, if any, to be put directly on the plat if they are brief enough; otherwise, if covenants are separately recorded, a statement as follows: 
This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were recorded in record book ____________ , page number ____________ , and signed by the owner. 
(16)  A statement by the owner, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public uses, similar to the following: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE AND DECLARATION 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, drains, easements and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown for the purpose therein expressed on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
By: ____________     Owner 
(17)  Wording which indicates that the city manager and planning commission chairman have reviewed the criteria for administrative approval and found the plat to be in compliance with the requirements for minor subdivisions as follows: 
Certificate of Administrative Plat Approval   By City Manager and Planning Commission Chairman 
This plat has been reviewed for standards under the definition of administrative subdivision. All platting requirements are complete. Approval was therefore granted on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ by the City Manager and planning commission. 
____________ ____________  City Manager 
____________ ____________  Planning Commission Chairman 
(18)  Certificate of final plat approval by the Grady County Health Department: 
Certificate of Administrative Plat Approval   By the Grady County Health Department 
An on-site inspection indicates that the installation of individual water wells and/or sewage disposal systems on this subdivision has been designed according to the Grady County Health Department's regulations. This administrative plat was given approval by the Grady Department of Public Health on this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 
____________ ____________  Grady County Environmental  Health Specialist 
(Ord. No. 512, § 8.10, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-101—19-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS, AND DESIGN 

Sec. 19-111. - General improvements. 
(a)  Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the requirements established in these regulations, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations: 
(1)  All applicable statutory provisions. 
(2)  The City of Cairo Zoning Ordinance, Building and Housing Codes, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions. 
(3)  The Official Master Plan, Official Map, Public Utilities Plan, and Capital Improvements Program of the City of Cairo, including all streets, drainage systems, and parks shown on the official map or master plan as adopted. 
(4)  The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the health department and/or appropriate state [agencies] or state sub-agencies. 
(5)  The rules of the state highway department if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street. 
(6)  The standards and regulations adopted by the city engineer and all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the City of Cairo. 
(7)  Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above laws, regulations, guidelines, and policies, as well as the purposes of these regulations. 
(b)  Adequate public facilities. No preliminary plat shall be approved unless the city council determines that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall, at the request of the city council, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities by possible uses of said subdivision. Public facilities and services to be examined for adequacy will include roads and public transportation facilities, sewerage, and water service. 
(1)  Periodically the city council will establish by resolution, after public hearing, guidelines for the determination of the adequacy of public facilities and services. To provide the basis for the guidelines, the planning commission must prepare an analysis of current growth and the amount of additional growth that can be accommodated by future public facilities and services. The planning commission must also recommend any changes in preliminary plat approval criteria it finds appropriate in the light of its experience in administering these regulations. 
(2)  The applicant for a preliminary plat must, at the request of the planning commission, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities and services by possible uses of said subdivision. 
(3)  Comprehensive master plan consistency required. Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the City of Cairo's comprehensive plan and all applicable capital improvement plans. 
(4)  Water. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
(5)  Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
(6)  Stormwater management. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The city council may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
(7)  Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation; shall be properly related to the comprehensive plan; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics or each proposed development. 
(8)  Extension policies. All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines, and telecommunication lines shall be constructed through new development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. The city council may require the applicant of a subdivision to extend off-site improvements to reach the subdivision or oversize required public facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of plat approval. 
(c)  Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference to those restrictions is required to be indicated on the subdivision plat and the restrictive covenants shall be recorded with the clerk of superior court at the time the final plat is recorded by the city. All recording fees shall be paid by the developer to the city prior to final plat recording. 
(d)  Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in another local government, the city council may request assurance from the city attorney that access is legally established, and from the city engineer that the access road is adequately improved, or that a guarantee has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines. 
(e)  Monuments. Monuments shall be placed on all lot corners, all angle points in a property line, and tangent points on right- of-way lines. Where a property line crosses a stream or other watercourse that is also a property line, a monument shall be placed on the property line within twenty (20) feet of the stream bank and the distance to the centerline of the watercourse called out on the final plat. The same type and size of monument shall be used throughout the subdivision and the final plat shall clearly call out the size and type of monument placed. Monuments shall be a permanent material and may be either a steel or iron pin one-half (½) inch or larger in diameter with a minimum length of thirty (30) inches. A concrete monument thirty (30) inches in length with a brass disk imbedded in the top shall be placed at all land lot corners on the boundary of the property being developed. A concrete monument shall either be six (6) inches in diameter or four (4) inches by four (4) inches square and extend no less than six (6) inches above the finished grade. 
(1)  All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be monumented in the field by like monuments as described above. These monuments shall be placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, and at all angle points in any line. 
(2)  All monuments required by these regulations shall be set flush with the ground. 
(3)  All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a Georgia Registered Land Surveyor prior to the time the city council recommends approval of the final plat. 
(f)  Character of the land. Land that the city council finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features that will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve any danger to public health, safety, and welfare. 
(g)  Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The city council shall have final authority to designate the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined at sketch plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-112. - Lot improvements. 
(a)  Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the zoning ordinance and health regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on the lots from an approved street. 
(b)  Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the city council may require that those lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and these regulations. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Lot orientation. The lot line common to the street right-of-way shall be the front line. All lots shall face the front line and a similar line across the street. Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that the rear line does not about the side line of an adjacent lot. 
(d)  Double frontage lots and access to lots. 
(1)  Double front lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(2)  Access from major and secondary arterials. Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from a major or secondary street. Where driveway access from a major or secondary street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the city council may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the street. Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on major and secondary arterials. 
(e)  Soil and grading; lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
(f)  Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of those items and materials shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy on a subdivision. No items and materials as described in the preceding sentence shall be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of any subdivision improvement agreement or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner. 
(g)  Waterbodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the adjacent lots. The city council may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so placed that it will not become a local government responsibility. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum area of a lot required under the zoning ordinance may be satisfied by land that is under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, of design approved by the city engineer. 
(h)  Subdivision improvement agreement and security to include lot improvement. The applicant shall enter into a separate subdivision improvement agreement secured by a letter of credit or cash escrow to guarantee completion of all lot improvement requirements including, but not limited to, final grading, lot drainage, removal of debris and waste, fencing, and all other lot improvements required by the city council. Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, the City of Cairo may enforce the provisions of the subdivision improvement agreement where the provisions of this section or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation have not been met. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-113. - Roads. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing street on the official map. 
(2)  Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the City of Cairo construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the city engineer, in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval. 
(3)  Classification. All roads shall be classified as either major arterial, minor arterial, collector, or minor. In classifying roads, the City of Cairo shall consider projected traffic demands after twenty (20) years of development. 
(4)  Topography and arrangement. 
a.  Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Minor local roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many building sites as possible at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these regulations. 
b.  All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the official map and/or master plan. 
c.  All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
d.  Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
e.  The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout. 
f.  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the city council, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracks. 
g.  In business and industrial developments, the streets and other access ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. 
(5)  Blocks. 
a.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, or waterways. 
b.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed two thousand two hundred (2,200) feet or twelve (12) times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district, nor be less than four hundred (400) feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and collector streets shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length. 
c.  In long blocks the city council may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. 
d.  Pedestrian ways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be required by the city council through the center of blocks more than eight hundred (800) feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the city council for prospective use. 
(6)  Access to primary arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the city council may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
a.  The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the primary arterial, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
b.  A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the primary arterial. 
c.  A marginal access or service road (separated from the primary arterial by a planning or grass strip and having access at suitable points). 
(7)  Road names. The sketch plat, as submitted, shall indicate any names for proposed streets. The city council shall name all roads upon recommendation of the building official at the time of preliminary approval. The building official shall consult the local postmaster prior to rendering its recommendation to the city council. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other road names in the municipality so as not to cause confusion. A road which is (or is planned as) a continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name. 
(8)  Road regulatory signs. The applicant shall deposit with the City of Cairo at the time of final subdivision approval the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each road sign required by the city engineer at all road intersections. The city shall install all road signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any residence on the streets approved. Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which to be approved by the city engineer. 
(9)  Street lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in accordance with design and specification standards approved by the director of utilities. 
(10)  Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to the street. 
(11)  Construction of roads and dead-end roads. 
a.  Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and where the continuation is in accordance with the City of Cairo traffic plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a dead-end street, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T- or L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued. The city council may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
b.  Dead-end roads (permanent). Where a road does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the city council for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than fifty (50) feet. However, the city council may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the closed end of the road with a turn-around roadway having a minimum radius for the outside curb of at least fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Design standards. 
(1)  In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting, sanitation and road-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to impose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the design standards for roads according to Georgia Department of Transportation Standards Specifications/Construction of Roads and Bridges, 1993 Edition as amended or required. Unless otherwise indicated or required by a major street plan, street rights-of-way and pavement thereon shall not be less than the following: 

 
a.  Additional right-of-way width may be required to promote public safety and convenience, and to ensure adequate access, circulation and parking in high density residential areas, commercial areas, and industrial areas. 
b.  If a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of an adequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way in conformance with the above standards may be required. 
(2)  Road surfacing and improvements. After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the developer shall construct curbs and gutters where required and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. All surfacing shall be of a character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as determined by the city engineer. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the city council and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. 
(3)  Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three-to-one (3:1). 
(4)  Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
a.  In residential districts a buffer strip at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: 
"The strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structure on this land is prohibited." 
b.  In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad right-of-way shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance from the railroad right-of-way to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
c.  When streets parallel to the railroad right-of-way intersect a street which crosses the railroad right-of-way at grade, they shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(5)  Intersections. 
a.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at one point unless specifically approved by the city council. 
b.  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with an existing intersection on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be permitted except where the intersection street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart. 
c.  Minimum curb radius at the intersections of two (2) local streets shall be at least twenty (20) feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
d.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two (2) percent rate at a distance of sixty (60) feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
e.  Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance. 
f.  The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be three (3) percent or less. 
(6)  Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the city council, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without reimbursement from the City of Cairo. The sharing expense for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the city council, will be fixed by special agreement between the city council and the applicant. The cost of bridges that do not solely benefit the developer shall be charged to the developer pro rata based on the percentage obtained by dividing the service area of the bridge into the area of the land being developed by the subdivider. 
(c)  Road dedications and reservations. 
(1)  New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The city council may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within its own subdivision boundaries. 
(2)  Widening and realignment of existing roads. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the master plan, official map, or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at its expense those areas for widening or realignment of those roads. Frontage roads and streets as described above shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at its own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations when the applicant's development activities contribute to the need for the road expansion. Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the zoning ordinance whether the land is to be dedicated to the municipality in fee simple or an easement is granted to the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.03, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 522, § 1, 11-8-99; Ord. No. 688, § 2, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 19-114. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
(a)  General requirements. The planning commission shall not recommend for approval any plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for storm and floodwater runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the rational method, or other methods as approved by the city council, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. All subdivision drainage systems, both piped and channelized, receiving stormwater from off-site, shall be designed to handle and transport through the subdivision specific the 100-year level storm. Catch basins handling street stormwater shall be designed to handle a 25-year storm considering bypass, as prescribed by Georgia D.O.T. design requirements. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than six hundred (600) feet in the gutter where required. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. 
(b)  Nature of stormwater facilities. 
(1)  Location. The applicant may be required by the city council to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications. 
(2)  Accessibility to public storm sewers. 
a.  Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwaters, subject to the specifications of the city engineer. However, in subdivisions containing lots less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area and in business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved out-fall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the city engineer. 
b.  If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the city engineer and the city council, the developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the subdivision improvement agreement required for the subdivision plat. 
(3)  Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case, be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The facility shall be designed by the applicant's engineer and reviewed for approval by the city engineer based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Effect on downstream drainage areas. The city engineer shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Local government drainage studies, together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the city council may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the expansion of the existing downstream drainage facility. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility. 
(5)  Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area that is subject to flooding, the city council may approve such subdivision provided that the applicant fills the affected area of the subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and lots at a minimum of three (3) feet above the elevation of the 100-year floodplain, as determined by the city engineer. The plat of the subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width that shall be sufficient in times of high water to contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any structure be erected or placed in the overflow zone. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. The city council may deny subdivision approval for areas of extremely poor drainage. 
(6)  Floodplain areas. The city council, may when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property that lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. These floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps, except at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  Dedication of drainage easements. 
(1)  General requirements. When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided an undisturbed vegetation buffer (state law), a stormwater easement, or drainage right-of-way as appropriate, conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose. Where required by state law, or otherwise possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with an undisturbed vegetative buffer or landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(2)  Drainage easements. 
a.  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall extend from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
b.  When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. 
c.  The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by a drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses to a distance to be determined by the city council. 
d.  Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density procedures nor for computing the area requirement of any lot. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.04, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-115. - Water facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  When a public water main is not accessible, the developer shall take necessary action to extend a water supply system capable of providing for domestic water use and fire protection. 
(2)  When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of state or local authorities. All water mains shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter. 
(3)  Water main extensions shall be approved by the officially designated agency of the state or local government. 
(4)  The location of all fire hydrants and water supply improvements, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing same shall be borne by the developer and included in the subdivision improvement agreement and security to be furnished by the developer. 
(b)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than five hundred (500) feet apart and within four hundred (400) feet of any structure. A cut-off valve shall be installed with every hydrant. Plans for the installation of fire hydrants shall be approved by the Cairo Fire Chief. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. A cut-off valve shall be installed with every hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.05, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-116. - Sewerage facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the City of Cairo construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed and approved in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the city engineer, health department, and other appropriate agency. 
(b)  Residential and nonresidential districts. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by approving officials and agencies. No individual disposal system or treatment plants (private or group disposal systems) shall be permitted. Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the installation of laterals in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the specifications, rules, regulations, and guidelines of the health officer, city engineer, and appropriate state agency. 
(c)  Mandatory connection to public sewer system. If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the owner of the property shall be required to connect to the sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal system. 
(d)  Design criteria for sanitary sewers. 
(1)  General guidelines. These design criteria are not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in those instances when considered justified by the city engineer. 
(2)  Design factors. Sanitary sewer system should be designed for the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning regulations and approved applicable reports. Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. The unit design flows presented below should be adequate in each case for the particular type of development indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area using the following criteria: 

 
These design factors shall apply to watersheds of three hundred (300) acres or less. Design factors for watersheds larger than three hundred (300) acres and smaller than one thousand (1,000) acres shall be computed on the basis of a linear decrease from the applicable design factor for an area of three hundred (300) acres to a design factor of .01 c.f.s./acre unless otherwise directed by the city engineer. Design factors for watersheds larger than one thousand (1,000) acres shall be .01 c.f.s./acre unless otherwise directed by the city engineer. 
(3)  Maximum size. The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  Minimum size. No public sewer shall be less than eight (8) inches in diameter. 
(5)  Minimum slope. All sewers shall be designed to give mean velocities when flowing full of not less than two and seven tenths (2.7) feet per second. All velocity and flow calculations shall be based on the Manning Formula using an N value of 0.013. The design slopes shall be evenly divisible by four (4). The slopes shall be minimum for the size indicated. Exceptions to these minimum slopes shall be made at the upper end of lateral sewers serving under thirty (30) houses. Sewers at the upper end shall have a minimum slope of 0.76 percent. When lateral sewers serve less than ten (10) houses, the minimum slope shall be not less than one (1) percent. (See table below.) 
MINIMUM SLOPES FOR SEWER SIZE INDICATED 

 
(6)  Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with straight alignment between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the city engineer. 
(h)  Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; at all changes in grade, size or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances not greater than four hundred (400) feet for sewers fifteen (15) inches and smaller, and five hundred (500) feet for sewers eighteen (18) inches in diameter and larger. 
(8)  Manholes. The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and the manhole invert shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches except where required to match crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by the city engineer. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified by the city engineer. Inside drop manholes will require special considerations; however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance be less than that indicated above. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the crown of the smaller sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one. The minimum drop through manholes shall be two-tenths (0.2) foot. 
(9)  Sewerage locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements on private property, access shall be to all manholes. A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End lines shall be extended to provide access from street or alley right-of-way when possible. Imposed loading shall be considered in all locations. Not less than four (4) feet of cover shall be provided over the top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or three (3) feet in all other areas. 
(10)  Cleanouts and lampholes. Cleanouts and lampholes will not be permitted. 
(11)  Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water supply sources and structures. 
(12)  Relation of sewers to water mains. A minimum horizontal distance of ten (10) feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of cast iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten (10) feet in each direction from the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line. This will not be required when the water main is at least two (2) feet above the sewer. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.06, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-117. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Required improvements. 
(1)  Sidewalks where required shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement right-of-way of all roads. 
(2)  Concrete curbs are required for all roads when sidewalks are required by these regulations or when required in the discretion of the city council. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be improved as required in section 19-113(b)(2) of these regulations. A median strip of grassed or landscaped areas at least two (2) feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. 
(b)  Pedestrian accesses. The city council may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least twenty (20) feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.07, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-118. - Utilities. 
(a)  Location. All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Whenever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except when existing on public roads and rights-of-ways, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. At the discretion of the city council, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended to be developed for the same primary use. 
(b)  Easements. Easements centered on lines shall be provided for utilities (private and municipal) and such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.08, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-119. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
(a)  General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to the land shall make provision as the city council may require. A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in the zoning ordinance. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the city council. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the city council, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the master plan, official map, and zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city council the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
(2)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
(3)  Special requirements may be imposed by the city council with respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction. 
(4)  Special requirements may be imposed by the city council with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and stormwater drainage. 
(5)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
(6)  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential areas. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 9.08, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-120—19-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 

Sec. 19-131. - Prior approval. 
No construction activity of any kind including grading and the installation of improvements shall begin on any land subject to this chapter without prior approval of the engineering requirements and preliminary plat by the Cairo City Council. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 10.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-132. - Grading. 
Grading operations may begin following approval of the preliminary plat or the institution of a subdivision improvement agreement and the posting of both a performance and maintenance bond. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 10.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-133. - Inspections. 
Periodic inspection during the installation of the physical improvements in a subdivision shall be made by a duly authorized official of Cairo to insure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the city when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 10.03, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-134. - Sale and transfer. 
No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred until the final plat, of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 10.04, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-135. - Occupancy. 
No structure constructed concurrent with subdivision development shall be occupied until the final subdivision plat has been filed with the clerk of the superior court by the City of Cairo. If a subdivision improvement agreement is in place, no certificates of occupancy shall be granted prior to the certification by the city engineer that the required improvements have been completed to the city's standards. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 10.05, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-136—19-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 19-146. - Violations. 
In case of any violation or attempted violation of the provisions of this chapter, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violation or attempted violation. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 11.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-147. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any owner or proprietor of any tract of land who subdivided that tract of land and who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by the law. 
(b)  Any subdivision hereafter established shall be designed, developed, and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with the regulations herein shall result in the following: 
(1)  The city shall not accept the subdivision, nor shall it improve, maintain, grade or pave any street within such subdivision unless such street shall have met the specifications described herein. If a subdivision improvement agreement has been executed, the city engineer shall not certify that the improvements have been satisfactorily completed unless they meet the specifications described herein. 
(2)  No public agency shall authorize the extension of water service, sewer service or other publicly operated services into such subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 11.02, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-148. - Amendments. 
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the city but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendations. The planning commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to make its review and submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the thirty-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposal. Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the city shall hold one (1) public hearing thereon, at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 11.03, 12-14-98) 
Secs. 19-149—19-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - APPEALS 

Sec. 19-156. - Purpose of article. 
This article is established to identify the procedure whereby any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator, city clerk, planning commission or any other party. 
(Ord. No. 512, Art. XII, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-157. - Appeal to the city council. 
Any party aggrieved because of the alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector, planning commission or any other party in enforcement of this chapter, may appeal in writing to the city clerk for and receive a hearing by the city council for an interpretation of the pertinent ordinance [chapter] provision. In exercising this power of interpretation, the city council may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector, planning commission or any other party. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 12.01, 12-14-98) 
Sec. 19-158. - Appeal from the mayor and council decision. 
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the city council may seek review of such decision by a court of record, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 12.02, 12-14-98) 
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Court appearances by persons charged with traffic violations, § 9-19; abandoned vehicles, § 12-40; noise, §§ 12-6, 12-7; political activities on streets, § 15-10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
Pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 40-6-372, the chapter known as "Uniform Rules of the Road," sections 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, is hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 236, § 1, 11-14-77) 
Sec. 20-2. - Responsibility for enforcement of provisions. 
The police officers of the city shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and all state laws regulating motor vehicles. 
(Code 1965, § 30-1) 
State Law reference— Obedience to authorized persons, OCGA, § 40-6-2. 
Sec. 20-3. - Control of traffic by police. 
The members of the police department shall control and regulate the movement of all vehicles or pedestrians at such street intersections and congested places as may, in the judgement of the city manager or the chief of police, require control and regulation from time to time on account of congestion or traffic hazards. 
(Code 1965, § 30-2) 
Sec. 20-4. - U-turns. 
No person operating a vehicle shall make a U-turn in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 30-17) 
State Law reference— U-turns, OCGA, § 40-6-121. 
Sec. 20-5. - Violation of traffic ordinances. 
The penalty for violation of any traffic ordinance will be as set forth within section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 754, § 1, 1-13-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 379, § 1, adopted July 23, 1990, repealed former § 20-5 of the Code, which pertained to disorderly driving and derived from the 1965 Code, § 30-25.   Subsequently, Ord. No. 754, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 2014, enacted new provisions as set out herein. 
Sec. 20-6. - Locations of traffic-control signals. 
Traffic-control signals, with customary alternating green, amber and red lights, shall be installed at the following street intersections: 
(1)  1st Ave. N.E. and N. Broad 
(2)  1st Ave. N.E. and 5th St. N.E. 
(3)  1st Ave. S.W. and S. Broad 
(4)  2nd Ave. S.W. and S. Broad 
(5)  5th St. N.E. and 38th Blvd. N.E. 
(6)  N. Broad and State Highway #38 
(7)  S. Broad and 4th Ave. 
(8)  N. Broad and 3rd Avenue. (Ord. No. 447, § 1, 6-12-95) 
(9)  2nd Ave. and 5th St. S.E. 
(10)  20th Street, N.E. and State Highway #38 
(11)  Hall Road and State Highway #38 
(12)  4th Street, S.W. and Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue, S.W. 
(Ord. No. 1965, § 30-53; Ord. No. 539, § 1, 9-11-00) 
Sec. 20-7. - One-way streets, alleys; specified turns on certain streets. 
(a)  In the following streets and alleys, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated: 

 
(9)  All travel on 4 th Avenue S.W. from 11 th Street S.W. to 13th Street S.W. from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days shall be one-way from east to west. (Ord. No. 581, § 1, 8-14-02) 
(10)  All travel on 10th Avenue, N.W. from 4th Street, N.W. to U.S. Highway 84 from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days shall be one-way from west to east. 
(b)  [Specified turns on certain streets:] 
(1)  All traffic proceeding east on U.S. Highway 84 shall be prohibited from making left turns onto 8th Avenue, N.E. (Ord. No. 447, § 2, 6-12-95) 
(2)  All traffic proceeding east onto 8th Avenue, N.E., shall be prohibited from turning left on U.S. Highway 84. (Ord. No. 447, § 2, 6-12-95) 
(3)  All traffic proceeding west on 8th Avenue, N.E., shall be prohibited from turning left onto U.S. Highway 84. (Ord. No. 447, § 2, 6-12-95) 
(Code 1965, § 30-61; Ord. No. 689, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 746, § 1, 8-26-13) 
Sec. 20-8. - Blocking of street crossings by trains. 
No railroad train, engine or car, operating or passing through the city, shall stand upon or obstruct any street crossing within the city for more than five (5) minutes. 
(Code 1965, § 20-21) 
Sec. 20-9. - Through streets designated. 
The following streets and portions thereof are hereby declared to be through streets: 

 
(Code 1965, § 30-46; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 9-10-84; Ord. No. 410, § 1, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 543, § 1, 10-23-2000; Ord. No. 620, § 1, 10-25-04; Ord. No. 626, § 1, 6-23-05; Ord. No. 651, § 1, 2-19-07; Ord. No. 677, § 1, 1-31-08; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 8-26-13; Ord. No. 777, § 1, 8-24-15) 
Cross reference— Railroad crossings are through streets, § 20-10. 
Sec. 20-10. - Railroad crossings considered through streets. 
(a)  All railroad crossings in the city are hereby designated and shall be held and considered as through streets, unless any one or more of such railroad crossings are protected by railroad signaling devices or a railroad signal person. 
(b)  The operators of a motor vehicle shall come to a stop before entering any such unprotected crossing. 
(c)  The requirements of subsection (b) shall be the same as that required by the general laws of this state with regard to railroad crossings. 
(Code 1965, § 30-47) 
State Law reference— Stopping at railroad crossings, OCGA § 40-6-140 et seq. 
Sec. 20-11. - Fishing from right-of-way, bridge or culvert. 
No person shall fish or prepare to fish either on or from any point on the right-of-way of any public street or highway, or on or from any bridge or culvert located on any public street or highway in the city. 
(Code 1965, § 28-5) 
Secs. 20-12—20-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED 

Sec. 20-20. - Speed zones on state highway system. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of the indicated speeds on state highways, as follows: 
(1)  State highway system: 

 
(b)  On state highway system signs are to be erected by state department of transportation. 
(Code 1965, § 30-29; Ord. No. 236, § 2, 11-14-77; Ord. No. 314, 7-13-87; Ord. No. 411, 3-9-92; Ord. No. 458, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 463, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 706, § 1, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 720, §§ 1, 2, 7-26-10; Ord. No. 733, §§ 1, 2, 9-12-11; Ord. No. 762, § 1, 10-13-14) 
Sec. 20-20.1. - Speed zones in school zones on state highway system. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of the indicated speeds on school days, in school zones, as specifically set out in section 20-20, on state highways during the indicated hours as set out in the following subsection (b). 
(b)  School zone hours are effective on school days only, in the a.m. from forty-five (45) minutes prior to commencement time to fifteen (15) minutes after commencement time, and in the p.m. from fifteen (15) minutes prior to dismissal time to forty-five (45) minutes after dismissal time. 
(c)  On state highway systems, signs are to be installed by the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 367, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 371, 4-23-90; Ord. No. 373, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 411, 3-9-92; Ord. No. 458, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 463, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 706, § 2, 2-23-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 367, adopted Jan. 22, 1990; Ord. No. 371, adopted Apr. 23, 1990; and Ord. No. 373, adopted June 11, 1990; amended Ord. No. 314, adopted July 13, 1987; provisions of which were codified herein as §§ 20-20—20-22. As Ord. Nos. 367, 371, and 373 set out provisions relating specifically to school zones on the state highway system, a new § 20-20.1 was created, at the discretion of the editor, in order to clearly delineate between provisions set out in § 20-20 and to provide for ease in reference and indexing. 
Sec. 20-21. - Maximum speed within school zones off state highway system. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of the speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, on school days only, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. in school zones on streets not a part of the state highway system as set out in subsection (a) of section 20-21.1. 
(b)  On off-state highway systems, signs are to be installed by the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 1, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 458, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 463, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 706, § 3, 2-23-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 384, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 1990, amended the Code by striking § 20-21 in its entirety and inserting in lieu thereof a new § 20-21 to read as herein set forth. Prior to amendment, former § 20-21 pertained to speed zones on off-state highway system and derived from the 1965 Code, § 30-30; Ord. No. 236, § 3, adopted Nov. 14, 1977; and Ord. No. 314, adopted July 13, 1987. 
Sec. 20-21.1. - Speed zones for off state highway systems. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of the indicated speeds on the following streets not a part of the state highway system: 
(1)  Off state highway system: 

 
*** SCHOOL ZONES HOURS ARE EFFECTIVE *** 
  
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time -  SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 
  
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time -  SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 
(b)  [On off-state highway systems] signs are to be installed by the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 411, 3-9-92; Ord. No. 458, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 463, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 560, § 1, 7-9-01; Ord. No. 652, § 1, 2-14-07; Ord. No. 706, § 4, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 4-13-09; Ord. No. 762, § 2, 10-13-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 411, adopted March 9, 1992, in addition to amending §§ 20-20 and 20-20.1 herein, carried provisions for speed zones on off-state highway system which have been codified as § 20-21.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 20-22. - Streets not hereinabove specified. 
The maximum speed limit on all other portions of the streets, lanes, alleys, and roadways in the city, not hereinbefore specifically set out in sections 20-20 through 20-21 shall be thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(Code 1965, § 30-31; Ord. No. 236, § 4, 11-14-77; Ord. No. 314, 7-13-87) 
Sec. 20-23. - Speed of trains. 
(a)  All railroad trains coming into or passing through the city shall slow down to a speed of not exceeding twenty-five (25) miles per hour at the time of entering the corporate limits, and shall move and operate in and through the city at a rate of speed not exceeding twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(b)  Locomotives, while crossing the first street east of Broad Street (being known on the north side of the railroad right-of-way as Second Street, N.E.), the second street crossing east of Broad Street (being known north of the railroad right-of-way as Third Street N.E.), and also the first street crossing west of Broad Street (being known as Fourth Street, West, crossing), shall not travel at a rate of speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., daily, and shall not travel at a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., daily. 
(c)  The above rates of speed shall also apply at the crossing on North Broad Street. 
(d)  Engineers, conductors or others in control of trains violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(e)  The speed limits provided in this section shall not apply: 
(1)  To outbound trains going west after the engine has crossed the first street crossing west of Broad Street (being known as Fourth Street, west crossing). 
(2)  To outbound trains going east after the engine has crossed the first crossing east of the overpass on the street being known on the north side of the railroad as Fifth Street, N.E. (Tallahassee Highway overpass) said crossing beingimmediately east of the H.V. Kell Co. Warehouse, being 6th St. crossing being known on north of the railroad right-of-way as 6th St. N.E. 
(3)  To inbound trains going west until the engine of such inbound train has reached the east side of the first crossing east of the overpass on the street known on the north side of the railroad as Fifth Street, N.E. (Tallahassee highway Overpass Street, Ga. State Highway No. 93) such crossing being immediately east of H.V. Kell Co. Warehouse. 
(4)  To inbound trains going east until the engine of such inbound train has reached the west side of the crossing referred to as the first street crossing west of Broad Street (being known as Fourth Street, West, crossing). 
(Code 1965, §§ 20-19, 20-20) 
Secs. 20-24—20-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 

Sec. 20-30. - Parallel parking required; exception. 
(a)  No person shall park any motor vehicle on any street other than parallel to the curb, on the right side, in the direction the vehicle is fronting, except where parking spaces have been plainly marked off diagonally to the curb line. 
(b)  On first Street S.E., between Second Avenue S.E. on the north and Third Avenue S.E. on the south, parking at all times on the west side of said street shall be parallel to the curb. 
(Code 1965, § 30-37; Ord. No. 201, § 1, 11-12-73) 
Sec. 20-31. - Parking where curb painted yellow. 
No person shall park any vehicle at any point along a curb painted yellow. 
(Code 1965, § 30-38) 
Sec. 20-32. - Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. 
No person shall park any vehicle at any time in the following locations: 
(1)  First Street S.E., east side, between Second Avenue S.E. on the north and Third Avenue S.E. on the south. 
(2)  First Avenue S.W., south side, from its intersection with Fourth Street S.W. to its intersection with Second Avenue S.W. 
(3)  Third Avenue N.W., south side, from North Broad Street to First Street N.W. 
(4)  Third Avenue S.W., north side, from South Broad Street to point three hundred (300) feet west. 
(5)  Fifth Street S.E., east side, from Fifth Avenue S.E. to Sixth Avenue S.E. 
(6)  Sixth Avenue N.E., south side, for a distance of two hundred ten (210) feet eastward from the east line of the right-of-way of North Broad Street. 
(7)  Sixth Street N.E., west side, from First Avenue N.E. to a point one hundred seventy (170) feet north. 
(8)  North Alley, east side, entire length. 
(9)  West Alley, both sides, entire length. 
(10)  State Route 111, both sides, from M.P. 16.31 (Milelog 16.28) to 11th St. S.W. (Milelog 16.51). 
(11)  Twentieth Street, N.E. and S.E., both sides, from U.S. Highway 84 south to the corporation limits. 
(12)  Fifth Street, S.E. east side, from Second Avenue, S.E. to Syrupmaker Drive, North. 
(13)  First Avenue, N.E., south side, designated area being twenty (20) feet in length between North Broad Street and First Street, N.E. the midpoint of which is two hundred sixty-six (266) feet from the east margin of North Broad Street. 
(14)  First Avenue, N.E., south side two (2) designated areas being the length of the parking locations located immediately west of and east of the entrances to the parking area located between Southern Insurance Managers on the west side of the parking area and the various businesses on the east side of the parking area. 
(15)  State Route 93, west side, from Long Branch Road (County Road 315), M.L. 13.20, northward a distance of 528 feet to M.L. 13.30. 
(16)  Martin Luther King Avenue, north of right-of-way margin and the right-of-way margin of Holder Avenue to extend northeastward along Martin Luther King Avenue the distance of 26 feet from the east margin of the apron entering the location of a beauty shop and 36 feet along the north right-of-way margin of Holder Avenue from the west margin of the apron entering the beauty shop property at that location. 
(17)  Fourth Avenue, S.E., north side from Third Street, S.E., eastward 250 feet. 
(18)  The south side of Long Branch Church Road from 1,000 feet east of the intersection of Georgia Highway 93-111 eastward 2,400 feet. 
(19)  On Fourth Avenue, S.E., from the east right-of-way margin of Third Street, S.E., for a distance of 40 feet eastward. 
(20)  On both sides of Twelfth Avenue, N.E., from North Broad Street to Second Street, N.E. 
(21)  The south side of 6 th Avenue, N. E. from 5 th Street, N. E. to a driveway entrance being approximately one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(22)  On both sides of McIvor Drive from 20th Street, N.E. to 22nd Street, N.E. 
(Code 1965, § 30-40; Ord. No. 156, § 1, 3-9-70; Ord. No. 177, § 1, 10-25-71; Ord. No. 185, § 1, 8-28-72; Ord. No. 201, § 1, 11-12-73; Ord. No. 235, 11-17-77; Ord. No. 250, § 9, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 376, § 1, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 419, 7-13-92; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 11-11-96; Ord. No. 500, § 1, 1-12-98; Ord. No. 511, § 1, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 536, § 1, 7-24-2000; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 9-11-2000; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 611, § 1, 5-10-04) 
Sec. 20-33. - Parking limited. 
(a)  No person shall park any motor vehicle longer than fifteen (15) minutes in the three (3) designated spaces on the north side of Second Avenue N.W., which are located directly in front of the office entrance of Alltel Corporation, at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily. 
(b)  No person shall park any motor vehicle longer than two (2) hours in the following designated parking areas between the hours of 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. on Monday through Friday. 
(1)  The west side of North Broad Street and South Broad Street from Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue S.W. to Third Avenue, N.E.; 
(2)  The east side of North Broad Street and South Broad Street from Third Avenue N.E. to Second Avenue, S.E. 
(3)  Along that alley known as Oliver Lane; and 
(4)  The ten (10) parking locations fronting the south line of the CSX Transportation right-of-way extending east from South Broad Street. 
(5)  The south side of First Avenue, S.W. from South Broad Street to First Street, S.W. 
(c)  No person shall park any vehicle from 7:00 a.m to 4:00 p.m. school days only in the following location: 
(1)  On the west side of First Street N. W. extending southward from Tenth Avenue N. W. for the distance of 475 feet. 
(Code 1965, § 30-41; Ord. No. 259, § 2, 2-28-83; Ord. No. 432, § 1, 6-13-94; Ord. No. 471, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 520, § 1, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 7-24-2000; Ord. No. 538, § 1, 9-27-2000; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-11-02; Ord. No. 580, § 1, 8-14-02; Ord. No. 615, § 1, 6-14-04) 
Sec. 20-34. - Loading zones. 
No person shall park any vehicle except for the purpose of loading or unloading in the following areas: 
(1)  North Alley (lying between N. Broad and 1st St., S.E.), west side, for entire length. 
(2)  Second Street N.E., west side, beginning on a line representing an extension eastwardly of the north line of the north sidewalk of First Avenue N.E. and therefrom continuing northwardly for a distance of forty (40) feet. Said zone shall be used only for loading or unloading in connection with the business being operated in the building immediately westward of said loading zone. 
(Code 1965, § 30-62; Ord. No. 168, § 1, 2-22-71) 
Secs. 20-35—20-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets on which gasoline trucks are prohibited, § 11-3. 

Sec. 20-40. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Deviating truck: A truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
Truck: Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property and the body weight or combined body and load weight of which exceeds five (5) tons. 
Truck route: A way over certain streets as designated herein over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 1, 1-22-73) 
Sec. 20-41. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes herein established and on the other designated streets over which truck travel is permitted. 
(b)  This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Operation on street of destination. The operation of trucks upon any street when necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point, provided streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicle upon any street in the city. 
(3)  Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city public utilities, any contractor or materialman while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 2, 1-22-73) 
Sec. 20-42. - Truck routes established. 
There are hereby established within the city the following truck routes: 
(1)  Outside origin; outside destination: All trucks entering the city for destination points outside the city shall operate only over the following designated routes: 
(a)  Along U.S. Highway No. 84 from city limits to city limits. 
(b)  Along State Road No. 188 from northern city limits to its terminus at Fourth Avenue S.E. 
(c)  Along State Road No. 93 and State Road. No. 111 from northern city limits south to U. S. Highway No. 84; thence along U.S. Highway No. 84 to State Road No. 188; thence along the State Road No. 188 to Fourth Avenue S.E.; thence along State Road No. 93 to southern city limits and west along Fourth Avenue S.E., to State Road No. 111 and along State Road No. 111 to western city limits. 
(d)  Along State Road No. 38 Spur from State Road No. 188 eastward to U.S. Highway No. 84. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 3, 1-22-73) 
Sec. 20-43. - Truck traffic in the city. 
(a)  Outside origin, outside destination. All such trucks having an origin outside the city and having a destination outside the city are hereby prohibited from traveling over and being operated on Broad Street between the intersection of State Highway No. 38 and State Highway Nos. 93 and 111 on the north and Fourth Avenue S.E. and Fourth Avenue S.W. on the south. 
(b)  Outside origin, one inside destination point. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(c)  Outside origin, multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(d)  Inside origin, outside destination point. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city, and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the most direct route in the direction of its destination to the nearest direct truck route. 
(e)  [Additional provisions.] Trucks having fourteen (14) wheels or more shall be prohibited on 17 th Avenue NW from North Broad Street to U.S. Highway 84 West. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 5, 1-22-73; Ord. No. 678, § 1, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 20-44. - Truck parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck on any street, avenue, or any portion of a lot within any single family estate district and dwelling zoning district within the city except to load or unload its cargo. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 1, 6-26-89) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 360, § 1, adopted June 26, 1989, repealed former § 20-44 of the Code, which pertained to deviating truck parking and derived from Ord. No. 194, § 5-A, adopted Jan. 22, 1973; and Ord. No. 251, adopted July 27, 1981; said § 1 of Ord. No. 360, furthermore, added provisions to the Code as a new § 20-44 as herein set out. 
Sec. 20-45. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Clerk maintains maps. The city clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public. 
(b)  Chief of police maintains signs. The chief of police shall cause all truck routes and those streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly sign-posted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(c)  Failure to post signs. No person shall be charged with violating the provisions of this article by reason of operating a truck upon a street wherein truck travel is prohibited unless appropriate signs are posted on such street. 
(d)  Weigh-in. The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 6, 1-22-73) 
Editor's note— Formerly, Art. V, Signs, contained substantive §§ 20-51—20-53, derived from Ord. No. 390, adopted Jan. 7, 1991; and Ord. No. 506, § 1, adopted Mar. 23, 1998. Such provisions were repealed by Ord. No. 553, § 1, adopted Mar. 26, 2001. 
Chapter 21 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1—21-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 21-20. - License—Required. 
No person shall operate a taxicab within the city without first procuring a license. 
(Code 1965, § 31-19) 
Sec. 21-21. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Any person proposing to operate a taxicab shall make written application to the city clerk on or before the first day of April of each year, stating the name, age, color, and sex of applicant; ownership, model, make, and serial number of vehicle; whether or not such vehicle is covered by public liability and property damage insurance. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit with each application a written, sworn statement signed by the owner or shop foreman of a licensed automobile repair shop approved by city manager, that such motor vehicle has been inspected, tested, and found to be in good mechanical condition and safe for operation. 
(Code 1965, § 31-20) 
Sec. 21-22. - Same—Annual fees. 
The annual fee shall be as prescribed in section 14-4. 
(Code 1965, § 31-21; Ord. No. 690, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 21-23. - Same—Granting or denying. 
(a)  Action by license committee: The city clerk shall examine each application and endorse such recommendation thereon as it considers best for the welfare, interest and protection of the public, and transmit the application to the city clerk for submission to the governing body for action. 
(b)  Action by governing body: The governing body shall act upon each application within a reasonable time and shall have full authority to grant or deny any application upon any ground which it deems reasonable and just, either with or without cause. 
(Code 1965, §§ 31-24, 31-25) 
Sec. 21-24. - Same—Insurance. 
(a)  No application or vehicle license shall be grated until the vehicle has been covered by liability and property damage insurance in the following amounts: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) liability coverage per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) liability coverage per accident, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage. 
(b)  The insurance shall run from the first day of April of any year in which a taxicab license is issued through the thirty-first day of March of the year following. The insurance policy shall run concurrently with the license issued to operate taxicabs in the city, whether or not the license to operate is issued on the first day of April of any year or some date subsequent thereto. 
(c)  No insurance policy presented with the application for a taxicab license will meet the requirements of this section unless the policy is issued by an insurance company licensed to do business within the state. 
(d)  Should the insurance cease to be effective or operative, the license shall be immediately suspended and revoked. 
(Code 1965, §§ 31-26, 31-27; Ord. No. 710, § 1, 5-11-09) 
Sec. 21-25. - Same—Suspension and revocation. 
Should the holder of any taxicab license violate any of the provisions of this article, such holder's license may be suspended by the city manager without notice at the next regular meeting of the governing body, and may be revoked by the governing body after notice and hearing. 
(Code 1965, § 31-28) 
Sec. 21-26. - Driver's permit—Application; carrying. 
(a)  All taxicab drivers or operators shall, on or before the first day of April of each year, file with the city clerk an application for a driver's permit stating his age, color and sex. 
(b)  The applicant shall also submit a statement signed by some physician practicing medicine in the city that such applicant has been examined and found to be physically fit to perform such duties. 
(c)  A driver's permit, when granted, shall be carried upon the driver's person at all times while engaged in the operation of a taxicab. 
(Code 1965, § 31-22) 
Sec. 21-27. - Same—Fee. 
The annual fee for a driver's permit shall be five dollars ($5.00). 
(Code 1965, § 31-23) 
Sec. 21-28. - Vehicle markings; lights. 
(a)  All taxicabs shall be distinctively marked with painted signs and equipped with lights prescribed by the chief of police and approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Such lights shall be turned on and displayed at all times between sunset and sunrise while the taxicab is in operation. 
(Code 1965, § 31-11) 
Sec. 21-29. - Safe condition of vehicle required for operation. 
No person shall operate a taxicab within the city unless it is in good repair and safe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1965, § 31-12) 
Sec. 21-30. - Vehicle inspections. 
(a)  Every taxicab shall be inspected and tested by a trained and experienced mechanic between the first and fifth day of each calendar month. 
(b)  The results of such inspection shall be sworn to by the owner or shop foreman of a licensed automobile repair shop approved by the city manager and filed with the chief of police. 
(c)  The chief of police or city manager may require such mechanical inspection weekly or bi-monthly if the age, operation or mechanical condition of any particular vehicle is deemed to be unsafe for public use and hire. 
(Code 1965, § 31-13) 
Chapter 22 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 548, passed Jan. 8, 2001, provided for the adopting and codification of a new zoning ordinance for the city. Such ordinance has been included herein as Ch. 22 in lieu of the former zoning ordinance derived from Ch. 33 of the 1965 Code as subsequently amended. For more complete derivation of the former zoning ordinance, see the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume. Sections in the new zoning ordinance adopted by Ord. No. 548 were renumbered to conform to the numbering system of the Code and internal references were adjusted to reflect such renumbering; obvious typographical errors were corrected without comment; and words in brackets were added for purposes of clarity. Numerous section catchlines in the zoning ordinance are substantive and must be read as a part of the text for a more complete comprehension of the section. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cairo, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-2. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to all land and structures within the incorporated City of Cairo, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-3. - Authority of enactment. 
The mayor and city council enact this chapter [Ordinance No. 548] under the exercise of powers conferred upon it by the Georgia State Constitution, Section 2-6102 of the Code of Georgia, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-4. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the zoning ordinance [this chapter] is to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the public requirements; to conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the corporate area, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, there is hereby adopted and established an official zoning ordinance for the City of Cairo. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-5. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" includes "structures", the word "may" is permissive and the word "shall" is mandatory. 
Accessory building: A subordinate building or structure on the same lot, or part of the main building, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use. 
Accessory use: A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. 
Adult care facility: Personal care and supervision in a protective setting for adults outside their own home for which a fee is charged. The program may include the provisions of daily medical supervision, nursing and other health care support, psychosocial assistance, or appropriate socialization stimuli or a combination of these. Adult care is available for those persons who, because of physical and/or mental disability, are not capable of full time independent living. 
Adult entertainment businesses: Any business such as motion pictures, theaters, mini-motion theaters, erotic dancing, escort services, book stores, etc., characterized by an emphasis on sexual activities. 
Agriculture or agricultural: The bona fide use of a parcel of land for forestry, the cultivation of land, raising of crops, or the raising of livestock, animals, poultry, honeybees, aqua culture or similar agrarian activity and the related buildings, structures and appurtenances necessary to carry out the aforementioned activities. 
Animal husbandry: Agricultural practices involving the breeding, hatching, raising, producing, feeding, keeping, slaughtering or processing of poultry or livestock normally raised for food for commercial purposes and facilities for the production, processing or packaging of eggs or egg products. 
Antique store: A retail business that buys and sells secondhand items that are generally considered of value due to the age of the item. 
Antique mall: A permanently established retail business that not only buys and sells secondhand collectable items, but also rents tables, booths, or spaces within the store, which are subject to sales tax and business licenses, to other persons who want to buy and/or sell secondhand collectable items. 
Apartment house: A residential structure containing three (3) or more apartments (independent dwelling units). 
Apartment unit: One (1) or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising and independent, self-contained dwelling unit in building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
Bed and breakfasts: Overnight accommodations and a morning meal in dwelling unit provided to transients for compensation. Comment: Bed and breakfasts (B&B) accommodations differ from rooming and boarding houses in that they are truly transient accommodations, with guests rarely staying more than a few days. In addition, the owner almost always lives in the facility. The impact of a B&B should not be much greater than that of a private home with frequent house guests, with the exception of parking demand. 
Billboard: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises which the sign is located. 
Boarding house: A dwelling where meals or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation to three (3) or more persons by pre-arrangement for definite periods. A boarding house is to be distinguished from a hotel, motel or a nursing home. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the primary or predominant use of any lot. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the roof surface, if a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 
Caretaker or employee residence: An accessory residence located inside or addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land. Said residence must be occupied by a bona fide caretaker or the owner himself/herself as necessary to the property's orderly operation or safety. Industrialized buildings (modular homes/units) are allowed to serve as a caretaker's residence as long as the industrialized building (modular home/unit) meets the Southern Building Code Standards. Caretaker or employee residences will be permitted only in I-1, I-2 and AG districts. 
Carport: A roofed structure providing space for parking or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three (3) sides. 
Cemetery: A cemetery is an area of land set apart for the sole purpose of the burial of bodies of dead persons or animals and for the erection of customary markers, monuments, and mausoleums. 
Clinic: A professional office where the services of more than one (1) practitioner can be obtained and where patients are examined and/or treated on an out-patient basis and where no over-night accommodations are provided. 
Club or lodge: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association or other established group of persons for religious, social, educational or recreational or other like activities on a regular basis for the benefit of its members and not the general public. 
Cluster development: A development design technique that concentrates buildings on a part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreations, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive features. 
Cluster subdivision: A form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision or increase in the overall density of development, and the remaining land area is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas, or agriculture. 
Commission: The word "commission" shall mean the Planning Commission of Cairo. 
Community use: Administrative and legislative government offices, postal facilities, cultural facilities such as libraries, museums, meeting/reception/banquet halls, amphitheaters, band shells, and pavilions. 
Conditional use: A use which within certain districts specified by this chapter is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the city council after the planning commission has (1) reviewed that proposed site plans for the use, its location within the community, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; (2) has found the proposal not be contrary to the intent of this chapter; and (3) has recommended the use as specified after a public hearing. (See section 22-429, Conditional uses). 
Condominium home: A form of ownership of less than the whole of a building or system of buildings under a statute which provides the mechanics and facilities for formal filing and recording of divided interest in real property, whether the division is vertical or horizontal. 
Convalescent home: A convalescent home is a home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two (2) or more persons are cared for. Said home shall conform and qualify for license under state laws. 
Convenience store: A retail business with primary emphasis placed on providing the public with a convenient location to quickly purchase from a wide array of consumable products and services. Generally, the business will: (1) have a building size less than five thousand (5,000) square feet; (2) provide off-street parking and/or convenient pedestrian access; and (3) provide the public with extended hours of operations, many being open twenty-four (24) hours, seven (7) days per week. 
Day care facilities: There are three (3) types of day care: 
(a)  Family day care homes means a private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three (3) but not more than six (6) children under eighteen (18) years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
(b)  Group day care homes means any place operated by any person(s) partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay for group care not less than seven (7) nor more than eighteen (18) children under eighteen (18) years of age for less than twenty-four (24) hours without transfer of legal custody and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the department of human resources. 
(c)  Day care centers means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day without transfer of legal custody, nineteen (19) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age, and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the department of human resources. 
Density: The number of families residing on, or dwelling units developed on an acre of land. As used in this chapter, all densities are stated in families per gross acre. 
NOTE: Gross density includes all the area within the boundaries of the particular area, excluding nothing. 
Drive-in establishment: An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicle. 
Drive-in restaurant: A drive-in restaurant or other drive-in establishment serving food and/or drink so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle. 
Dwelling, duplex: A building either designed, constructed, altered or used for two (2) adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a common wall and/or of two (2) stories by a common floor. 
Dwelling, multiple: A building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in said building. This definition includes three-family houses, four-family houses, and apartment houses, but does not include hotels or motels. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building or portion thereof used or designed for use as a residence for a single family. 
Egress: An exit. 
Family: One (1) or more persons living together and related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, and occupying a dwelling unit as a single non-profit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, boarding house, fraternity or sorority house. A family shall be deemed to include domestic servants, gratuity guests, and not more than three (3) foster or boarded children whose room and board is paid by a recognized child care agency or organization. 
Flea market: A market at which new and used items are temporarily displayed and sold on rented tables. A flea market may be open or enclosed. 
Garage, mechanical: Buildings and premises where the functions and services for major repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, lawn mowers or other motor vehicles may be rendered. A mechanical garage which provides for the storage of vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts for sale or repair shall be classified as a junk yard. 
Garage, private: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than three (3) motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
Garage, public: Any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles, or place where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
Garage, repair: Any building, premises, and land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair, or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered. 
Gas station/mini-mart: Any building or other premises, or portion thereof, used for a combination automobile service station and retail sales of food and other items excluding any automotive service or repair areas; including but not limited to the sales of consumable products, rental of video tapes, use of self-service hot and cold beverage facilities and microwave ovens by customers for purchased food items. 
Group home: A facility or dwelling unit housing persons unrelated by blood or marriage and operating as a group family household. 
Comment: A group care facility may include half-way houses; recovery homes; and homes for orphans, foster children, the elderly, battered children and women. It also could include a specialized treatment facility providing less than primary health care. 
Guest house: A building or portion thereof used or designed for uses as a residence, specifically as an accessory use to be the principal building. 
Half-way home: A group home facility which is licensed or supervised by any federal, state or county health/welfare agency relating to drug abuse problems, offender rehabilitation or similar purposes. 
Hardship manufactured home: The temporary placement of a hardship manufactured home allowable to accommodate families in providing care to a family member by birth or marriage in cases of documented medical infirmity due to age or medical/mental disability. Hardship manufactured homes may be allowed after application is made and a review of the hardship manufactured home criteria outlined in section 22-32 reviewed. 
Home occupation: Any use conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on by the immediate family members thereof, which use is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling and does not change the character thereof. (See section 22-27, Home occupations). 
Impervious surface: Any material which reduces and prevents absorption of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. 
Industrialized building (modular home/unit): A structure or component which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in or at manufacturing facilities and delivered to a building site for fabrication and installation in such assemblies that all parts or processes cannot be inspected except by disassembly, by the city building official but in lieu of such inspection bears an insignia, label, or decal issued by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs to certify the unit as to construction and safety standards. 
NOTE: Industrialized buildings do not include manufactured housing. 
Ingress: Access or entry. 
Junk: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed or other use or disposition. 
Junk shall include vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, brush, wood, and lumber. 
Junk yard: Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery or two (2) or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other type of junk. Note: Buffers are required for junk yards. (See section 22-22, Protective screenings). 
Kennel: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic as well as non-domestic animals, four (4) months or more old, are kept either permanently or temporarily, for purpose of sale, care, breeding or training for which an income is provided. 
Loft dwellings: Loft dwellings are defined as residential dwelling units located on any floor other than the ground or street level floor within existing commercial buildings. (See section 22-204). 
Lot of record: A lot or parcel of land which has been lawfully recorded by subdivision plat or deed on the public records of the City of Cairo or before the date of adoption of Ordinance [No. 548, January 8, 2001]. 
Manufactured home: "Manufactured home" is a detached single-family dwelling unit, designed for long-term occupancy, which has been prefabricated and then transported to its site or to a sales lot usually on its own wheels, and requires only minor work before occupancy such as connection to utilities or to a foundation. Such units are usually fully equipped and furnished. The manufactured home shall bear an insignia issued by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) certifying that the unit is constructed in conformance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards which came into effect on June 15, 1976. 
Manufactured home parks: "Manufactured home park" shall mean a licensed business operation which leases spaces for permanent or for temporary occupancy for periods exceeding thirty (30) days for manufactured homes and, under some conditions, travel trailers. 
Manufactured home subdivision: A "manufactured home subdivision" is defined as at least a five (5) acre site which has been primarily designed for the subdivision of individual lots for manufactured home development. 
Mini-warehouse: A building(s) that contains varying sizes or individual, compartmentalized and control-access stalls or lockers for storing the excess personal property of an individual or family. No business activities other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises. 
Mobile home: A dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Modular home: See definition for "industrialized buildings". 
Nonconforming structure or building: Any structure, including an accessory structure legally existing prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 548 which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to the zoning ordinance but that fail by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district (See section 22-351 et seq.). 
Nonconforming use: A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Nursing homes: A facility that admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision. It maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in Chapter 290-5-8: Nursing Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources) as same hereafter may be amended. 
Open air business uses: Open air business uses shall include the following: 
(a)  Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment. 
(b)  Retail sale of fruit and vegetables. 
(c)  Miniature golf, golf driving range, children's amusement park or similar recreation uses. 
(d)  Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicles, boats or home equipment sales, service or rental services. 
(e)  Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools and similar use. 
(f)  Outdoor display and sale of items not suitable for indoor sales. 
Permitted use: Those uses specifically listed in a district which are permitted by right, not to include the nonconforming use or conditional use and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Personal care home: A building or group of buildings, a facility, or place in which is provided two (2) or more beds and other facilities and services—including rooms, meals, and personal care for non-family ambulatory adults for which a fee is charged. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in Chapter 290-5-35: Personal Care Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources) as same hereafter may be amended. For the purpose of this chapter, personal care homes are classified as follows: 
(a)  Family personal care home: A home for adults in a family type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two (2) through six (6) persons. 
(b)  Group personal care home: A home for adult persons in a residence or other type of building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven (7) through fifteen (15) persons. 
(c)  Congregate personal care home: A home for adults which offers care to sixteen (16) or more persons. 
Personal service: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel, for example, laundry, photographic studios, beauty shops, shoe repair, health clubs, clothing rental, etc. 
Planned unit development: A planned unit development is a single parcel of land within which a number of buildings are located or intended to be located in accordance with an overall plan of design and not in relation to a prearranged pattern of land subdivision. Examples of a planned unit development (P.U.D.) include a complex of apartment buildings or a commercial shopping center. A comprehensive development plan for such a project shall be submitted to the planning commission for their review and approval. 
Plat, sketch: A concept, informal map of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification. 
Professional office: The office of a member of a recognized profession maintained for the conduct of that profession. 
Quick-service food store (QSR): Any building which is used for the retail sale of food or food and other items. This may be the combination of the gas station/mini-mart as well as the addition of fast food restaurants. 
Rooming house: A building, which houses four or more individuals, but not more than sixteen (16), each renting from a landlord, without separate cooking facilities. 
Service station: Any building, land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; minor servicing and repair of automobiles, aircraft or boats, and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar other operating commodities and accessories for motor vehicles. 
NOTE: Temporary storage of vehicles shall not exceed forty-eight (48) hours. 
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the street property line, rear or side property lines of the lot, and the front, rear or side lines of a building. The term required setback means a line beyond which a building is not permitted to extend under the provisions of this chapter establishing the minimum depths and widths of yards. 
Sign, billboard: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises which the sign is located. [See also "Billboard".] 
Sign, outdoor advertising: Any card, cloth, paper, metal, glass, plastic, wood, plaster, stone or sign of other material of any kind, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building, structure or thing whatsoever. The term "place" as used in the definition of "outdoor advertising sign" and "outdoor advertising structure" shall include erecting, construction, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or other fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. See also "Sign, billboard". 
Single-family detached dwelling: A residential building designed for and occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 
(1)  Site-built single-family detached dwelling means a single-family detached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the building codes as adopted by the city/county. 
(2)  Class A single-family detached dwelling means a site-built single-family detached dwelling, a one-family manufactured home or a one-family industrialized home that meets or exceeds the compatibility standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under section XYZ. 
(3)  Class B single-family detached dwelling means a site-built single-family detached dwelling, a one-family manufactured home or a one-family industrialized home that does not meet the compatibility standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under section XYZ. 
Site plan: The development plan for one (1) or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, wetlands, and waterways; landscaping and open spaces; walkways; means of ingress and egress; circulation; utility services; structures and buildings; signs and lighting; berms, buffers, and screening devices; surrounding development; and any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by approving authority. 
Spot zoning: Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for a use incompatible with surrounding uses and that does not further the comprehensive land use plan. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground. 
Thrift store: A retail business that operates from the resale of used household items that are donated or purchased at a very low rate. These items may be new or used. 
Townhouse: One of a group of two (2) or more attached single-family residences. Each townhouse unit is separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved fire wall or walls. Fire walls shall be located on the lot line. Each townhouse has a front and rear ground level entrance. The townhouse is located on its own approved, recorded "lot". 
Travel trailer: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent-trailer or other similar vehicular or portable structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation, recreation or other trips which provide sleeping accommodations. 
Travel trailer parks: Travel trailer park where the principal use is for overnight tourists, or for vacationers whose stay will not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. 
Two-family dwelling: A residential building designed for and occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units. 
(1)  Site-built two-family dwelling means a two-family dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the building codes as adopted by the city/county. 
(2)  Class A two-family dwelling means a site-built two-family dwelling, a two-family manufactured home or a two-family industrialized home that meets or exceeds the compatibility standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under section XYZ. 
(3)  Class B two-family detached dwelling means a site-built two-family dwelling, a two-family manufactured home or a two-family industrialized home that does not meet the compatibility standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under section XYZ. 
Undue hardship: A condition which shall be considered to exist only when one (1) or more of the following apply to a particular piece of property, and such condition has not been created by action of the property owner. 
(a)  The owner cannot comply with the provisions of this chapter without violating some other ordinance or sections of this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter create for the property owner a peculiar condition not common to other nearby property owners. 
(c)  A conforming use or requirement is incongruous with the remainder of the area in which the property is located. 
(d)  The topography of the land or shape of a particular lot precludes a conforming use. 
Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance [this chapter] where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the particular property and not the result of any action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter's, requirements would result in unnecessary and undue hardship (see section 22-430). 
Zero lot line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
(Ord. No. 548, Art. II, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 1, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 699, § 1, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 22-6. - Application of general provisions. 
In addition to the other requirements, the use of land shall be subject to the general provisions set forth in sections 22-7 through 22-32. 
(Ord. No. 548, Art. III, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-7. - Conflicting regulations. 
Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, the provision of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-8. - Scope. 
No building or structure or part thereof, shall hereinafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-9. - Streets, alleys, and railroad rights-of-way. 
All streets, alleys and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting such streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such street or alley, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-10. - Permitted uses. 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered; nor shall any building or land be used, designed or arranged for any purpose other than is permitted in the zoning district in which the building or land is located. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-11. - Permitted area. 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-12. - Permitted height. 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit hereinafter established for the district in which the building is located, except that penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts and screens, flag poles, chimneys, smokestacks, individual domestic radio and television aerials and wireless masts, water tanks or similar structures may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed. No such structure may be erected to exceed by more than fifteen (15) feet the height limits of the district in which it is located; nor shall such structure have a total area greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the roof area of the building; nor shall such structure be used for any residential purpose or any commercial or industrial purpose, other than a use incidental to the main use of the building. The erection of radio and television transmitting, relay or other types of antenna towers, where permitted, shall abide by the regulations set forth. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.06, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-13. - Continuance of nonconforming use. 
Any use or structure existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued with the following limitations. Any use or building which does not conform to this chapter (see section 22-351 et seq.) may not be: 
(a)  Changed to another nonconforming use. 
(b)  Re-established after discontinuance for twelve (12) months. 
(c)  Extended except in conformity with these regulations. 
(d)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the building immediately prior to damage, excepting buildings that have an age of more than one hundred (100) years, which building, if rebuilt or restored, shall be substantially restored to the same appearance as before the damage occurred provided, however, that a building permit to initiate restoration must be obtained within six (6) months of the occurrence of damage. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.07, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 600, § 1, 10-13-03; Ord. No. 605, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 22-14. - Only one main structure (principal use) per lot. 
Only one (1) main structure or building and its customary accessory structures shall hereafter be placed or erected on any residential lot, except with the PUD zoning districts. Within the PUDs and R-3 districts site development plans will be reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.08, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-15. - Substandard lots. 
Any residentially zoned lot which was of record at the time of the adoption of Ordinance No. 548 that does not meet the requirements of this chapter for yards or other area or open space, may be utilized for single residence purposes, provided the area for such yard or court in width, depth, or open space is not less than sixty-five (65) percent of that required by the terms of this chapter, excepting that vacant lots having in the aggregate a continuous frontage of one hundred twenty (120) feet or more shall not be subject to this exception. The purpose is to permit utilization of recorded lots which lack adequate width or depth as long as reasonable living standards can be provided. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.09, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-16. - Frontage. 
Every principal residential dwelling shall front upon a public street, except that in the case of the planned unit developments in the R-PUD multiple residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.10, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-17. - Sight distance at intersections. 
In all zoning districts, other than the C-2 central business district, no fence, wall, hedge or shrub planting which obstructs the site lines at elevations between two (2) and twelve (12) feet above the roadways shall be placed on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded property corner, from the intersection of the street property lines. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.11, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-18. - Reduction of lot area prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width, yard requirements, lot area per dwelling unit, or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.12, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-19. - Accessory residential buildings. 
Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this chapter applicable to main or principal buildings. 
(b)  Accessory buildings, except garages; shall be erected in any required yard except a front yard, providing further that in no instance shall such a building be nearer than five (5) feet to any adjoining side lot line or rear lot line. 
(c)  An accessory building shall not exceed the height of the primary structure. 
(d)  An accessory building shall not be located on that portion of the lot in the area of the principal building except when structurally attached to the principal building. 
(e)  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any principal building. 
(f)  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both street frontages wherever there are any principal buildings fronting on said streets in the same block or adjacent blocks. 
(g)  When an accessory building is to be located on a corner lot, said building shall not project beyond the front yard line required on the lot of such corner lot. 
(h)  Garages/carports. In any residence zone, no garage or carport shall be erected closer to the side lot line than the permitted distance for the dwelling, unless the garage or carport shall be completely to the rear of the dwelling in which event, the garage or carport may be erected five (5) feet from the side and rear lot line. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.13, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-20. - Prohibited uses in all residential districts. 
(a)  It shall be prohibited use in all residentially zoned districts including manufactured home parks to park or store wrecked or junked vehicles, power driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material in large quantities that exceed those needed for the homeowner use. 
(b)  Tractor-trailer combinations, tractors or trailers shall not be placed or stored in residentially zoned districts. 
(c)  Kennels. 
(d)  Commercial ingress and egress will not be permitted in any residentially zoned districts. 
(e)  The raising of quail, fowl, poultry, fish bait and similar activities [will not be permitted in any residentially zoned districts]. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.14, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-21. - Service stations (public garages), gas stations/mini-marts, and quick service food stores (QSRs). 
In order to regulate and control the problems of noise, odor, light, fumes, vibrations, dust, danger of fire and explosion, and traffic congestion which result from the unrestricted and unregulated construction and operation of service stations, gas stations/mini-marts, and QSRs and to regulate and control the adverse effects which these and other problems incidental [thereto] may exercise upon adjacent and surrounding areas, the following regulations and requirements are provided herein for service stations, gas stations/mini-marts, and QSRs located in any zone. No service station, gas station/mini-marts, or QSRs existing on the effective date of this Ordinance No. 548 shall be structurally altered so as to provide a lesser degree of conformity with the provisions of this section than existed on the effective date of the ordinance. 
(a)  A service station, gas station/mini-mart, or QSR shall be located on a lot having a frontage along the principal street of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet, and having minimum area of not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(b)  A service station building housing an office and/or facilities for servicing, greasing and/or washing motor vehicles shall be located not less than forty (40) feet from any street lot line, and not less than ten (10) feet from any other lot line. 
(c)  For commercial driveways when one (1) or more driveways serve a given frontage, no single approach shall exceed fifty (50) feet. When a commercial establishment controls seventy-five (75) feet or more of street frontage, the number of driveways shall be limited to two (2) for the first seventy-five (75) feet or part thereof and not more than one (1) additional driveway for each additional seventy-five (75) feet. No portion of a driveway shall be less than ten (10) feet away from the property line not located at an intersection. When only one (1) lane of traffic is provided in a single driveway, the width of a driveway approach shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(d)  A raised curb six (6) inches in height shall be erected along all street lot lines, except for driveway openings. 
(e)  The entire lot, excluding the area occupied by a building, shall be hard surfaced with concrete or a plant-mixed asphalt material or if any part of the lots is not so surfaced, then that area shall be landscaped and separated from all surface areas by a low barrier or curb. 
(f)  All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle washing equipment, hydraulic hoists and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than fifteen (15) feet from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline or services while parked upon or overhanging any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way. 
(g)  A service station, gas station/mini-mart or QSR located on a lot having an area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall include not more than eight (8) dispensing nozzles and service stations may include up to two (2) enclosed stalls for servicing, lubricating, greasing and/or washing motor vehicles. An additional two (2) dispensing nozzles for service stations, gas stations/mini-marts, and QSRs and one (1) enclosed stall for service stations may be included with the provision of each additional two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area. 
(h)  Where a service station, gas station/mini-mart, or QSR adjoins any property located in any residentially zoned districts, or is separated from any such property by a public alley only, a landscaped greenbelt, fencing, or wall shall be provided and maintained by owners of said service station, gas station/mini-mart or QSR as spelled out in section 22-22, Protective screenings. 
(i)  All exterior lighting, including illuminated signs, shall be erected and hooded or shielded so as to be deflected away from adjacent public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.15, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-22. - Protective screening. 
All planting plans shall be first submitted to the planning commission for approval as to suitability of planting materials and arrangement thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If, in the opinion of the planning commission and approval by mayor and city council, the green belt would serve no good purpose, the commission may waive such requirements. 
(a)  Residential buffers. In order to provide adequate protective screening for residential areas adjacent to or near nonresidential areas, the following regulations shall apply: 
Adjacent residential property. Where a manufacturing or commercial district abuts directly upon a residentially zoned district, a landscaped greenbelt, fencing, or wall shall be provided and maintained by owners of said manufacturing or commercial properties as deemed appropriate by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. The following regulations and specifications for protective screening shall apply: 
(1)  Landscaped greenbelt. Such greenbelt shall not be less than twenty (20) feet wide and shall be planted with deciduous trees, evergreens, flowering trees or ornamental trees. 
(2)  Fencing. The fencing shall be opaque and made of any of the following types of materials: Clear heart redwood, heart cypress, red cedar, or treated Southern yellow pine or other suitable like materials. Such fencing shall be at least six (6) feet in height. 
(3)  Wall. The wall shall consist of brick, stone or other suitable like materials and shall be at least six (6) feet in height. 
(b)  Junk yard buffers. 
(1)  No junk yard shall be permitted closer than three hundred (300) feet to any R-1AA, R1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-PUD, or R-TH district; and 
(2)  A fence or wall, not less than eight (8) foot, shall be provided around the perimeter of said junk yard. Such fencing or wall shall be opaque and constructed of wood (as defined in section 22-22(a)(2) above, or masonry. Such fencing or wall shall be used to shield contents of said junk yard from view of public streets or adjacent areas. Fences or walls shall be properly maintained at all times; and 
(3)  No operations shall be conducted within junk yards which may cause a nuisance or endanger the public health; and 
(4)  There shall be no temporary or permanent storage at a junk yard of vehicles or junk outside of the fence or wall required (see section 22-22(b)(2) above, nor shall there be any cars or junk piled higher than seven (7) feet in height. 
(5)  All junk yards which are in existence on the effective date of Ordinance No. 548, shall be required to meet all the conditions set forth in section 22-22(b)(1) through (4) above, within one (1) year from the effective date of Ordinance No. 548. 
Where the development of manufactured commercial property or the establishment of a junk yard requires a buffer zone to protect the surrounding properties, said buffer zone should be depicted on the plat and/or recorded on the deed [to] said property. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.16, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 642, adopted Aug. 14, 2006, repealed the provisions of former § 22-23, which pertained to radio and television stations and derived from Ord. No. 548, adopted Jan. 8, 2001. 
Sec. 22-24. - Satellite receiving dish antennas. 
(a)  Satellite receiving dish antennas shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
(b)  However, in all residential zones the following requirements will apply: 
(1)  If the antenna shall be less than three (3) feet in diameter, the antenna shall be erected according to setback requirements from property lines as is the rule applicable to accessory buildings. The location of an antenna three (3) feet or larger in diameter, shall be confined to the rear yard and the setback requirements regarding location of the antenna, shall be the same as the rule applicable to accessory buildings. The location of an antenna of this size must be approved by the building inspection department before installation is permitted. 
(2)  The location of an antenna shall not create a hazard to traffic or interfere with public utilities. 
(c)  In all other zoning districts, antennas will be so placed as not to create a hazard to traffic or public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.18, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 717, § 1, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 22-25. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
The Cairo Planning Commission shall make a study of any property proposed for annexing into the City of Cairo and forward its zoning recommendations to the mayor and city council for their review and action. 
If the annexation is requested by anyone other than the City of Cairo, the applicant will pay the appropriate fees for a zoning petition. 
(1)  Zoning of property to be annexed may begin after the jurisdiction currently governing the property is notified in writing of the proposed annexation. 
a.  A zoning public hearing must be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the city. 
b.  A notice of the zoning public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation and a sign shall also be placed on the property to be annexed and zoned in accordance with sections 22-427 and 22-428. 
(2)  The zoning classification approved by the city following the required public hearing shall become effective on the later of the following two (2) dates: 
a.  The date the zoning is approved by the city; or 
b.  The date the annexation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.19, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-26. - Stormwater control. 
The director of public works (hereafter referred to as the director) shall review and approve a stormwater drainage plan for all classes of construction and property development prior to the issuance of any permits by the building inspector. The plan must include the following as a minimum: 
(1)  Provisions for stormwater retention, if required by the terms of this chapter. 
(2)  Plans for the controlled release of retained stormwater into the Cairo stormwater drainage system. (The rate of release cannot exceed predevelopment flow rates from the property being developed). 
(3)  A topographic map of the property or sufficient spot elevations on the plan at critical points to confirm direction of stormwater flow before and after development. Finished floor elevations must be shown. 
(4)  The approximate limits of any flood zone encroaching onto the property or a written statement that no part of the property is in a flood zone. 
(5)  Sizes of all existing and proposed stormwater facilities on or near the property which will be used to drain the property. Calculations to support the sizing of all drainage structures shall be submitted simultaneously with the drainage plan. 
(6)  If the property to be developed is contiguous to a state route or proposes to use a state department of transportation (DOT) drainage system for stormwater disposal, written evidence of coordination with DOT and copies of all DOT permits must be provided with the stormwater plan. 
The above described stormwater plan shall be developed by and bear the stamp of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
The above notwithstanding, a stormwater plan shall not be required on: 
(a)  A single-family residential lot of one (1) acre or less unless that lot is contiguous to a larger tract, which in the opinion of the director is likely to be developed in the near future. In this latter case, the director, at its [his/her] discretion, may require a drainage plan for the entire tract. 
(b)  New construction, where the total area to be paved and/or to be covered by roof is less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. If, however, the property abuts a state right-of-way, written evidence of coordination with DOT will be required. 
The developer must bear all costs associated with management of stormwater on the property to be developed. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.20, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-27. - Home occupations. 
The following regulations shall apply for home occupations: 
(1)  One (1) non-illuminated name plate, which is not more than two (2) square feet in area, may be attached to the building which shall contain only the name and occupation of the resident of the premises. 
(2)  No internal or external alterations or construction features, equipment, machinery, or outdoor storage not customary in residential uses. 
(3)  No article or service is sold or offered for sale on the premises, except such as is produced by such occupation. 
(4)  Barber shops, beauty shops, tanning bed salons, massage therapy, addressing/billing service, art instructor, music teacher, photography, seamstress, internet-based business, family daycare, home office for small service-based business such as insurance agent, real estate agent, tax consultant, construction contractor, lawn care or cleaning service. 
(5)  Home occupations shall not include any type of retail business or manufacturing business, except craft or hobby-type businesses. 
(6)  Home occupations shall not include any clairvoyance or fortune telling business. 
(7)  Any violations of the aforementioned regulations shall be cause for revocation of a home occupation permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.21, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-13-01; Ord. No. 642, § 3, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-28. - Property divided by a zoning district. 
Where a zoning district divides a lot, tract or parcel of land at the time such district boundary is established, the use classification of the less restricted district may be extended to the property line, but shall not be extended more than a distance of one hundred (100) feet without the permission of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.22, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-29. - Development of regional impact threshold review. 
Developments of regional impact are large development projects that are likely to create impacts in other local jurisdictions. The city will comply with state intergovernmental review procedures relating to new developments proposed within the city which meet or exceed the minimum thresholds identified in the department of community affairs' Procedures and Guidelines for the Review of Development of Regional Impact (DRI). A copy of these Procedures and Guidelines for the Review of Development of Regional Impact (DRI) can be found in the Appendix. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.23, 1-8-01) 
Editor's note— Such Procedures and Guidelines for the Review of Development of Regional Impact (DRI) referenced above are not set out at length herein, but are on file and available for inspection with the city. 
Sec. 22-30. - Modular office units. 
Modular office units will be permitted uses only in the C-2, I-1, and I-2 districts with the following restrictions: 
(a)  All modular office units will be placed on a permanent foundation; and 
(b)  All modular office units will be oriented to parallel the public street on which the office fronts; and 
(c)  [Modular office units are] Required to meet the Southern Standard Building Codes. 
*Mobile homes may not be used as offices. A manufactured home may only be used as an office for the sale of manufactured housing. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.24, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-31. - Telecommunication antennas and towers. 
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and regulations for the siting of antennas and towers. 
(a)  All siting of antennas and towers will be required to submit site plans first to the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the city limits of Cairo or within one-quarter (¼) mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. 
(c)  The following shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas. If, in the opinion of the planning commission and approval by mayor and city council, these requirements would serve no good purpose, the commission may waive such requirements. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(d)  Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided in Sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17 of the Official Code of Georgia, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.25, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-32. - Hardship manufactured homes/travel trailers. 
The planning commission may recommend to the mayor and city council approval of a variance for the use of one (1) hardship manufactured home or travel trailer per lot. The application for such a variance shall follow the general procedures for the rezoning including advertisement and public hearing requirements. The placement of one (1) hardship manufactured home or travel trailer on an occupied residential lot may be allowed if it is established that a genuine hardship exists only by reason of medical disability or age and the following variance criteria are met: 
(a)  The subject occupant of the manufactured home or travel trailer is a relative by blood or marriage of the owner of the property; and 
(b)  Documentation of medical disability or age infirmity is required to be certified by a medical doctor's statement. This certification will be valid for a one-year period. If an extension is needed after one (1) year, a new application for a hardship variance shall be submitted along with a new advertising fee; and 
(c)  Said manufactured home or travel trailer shall be removed from the premises within sixty (60) days when the specified disability ceases to exist; and 
(d)  Under no circumstances shall the manufactured home or travel trailer be rented or otherwise occupied by anyone other than the approved applicant, nor shall it be used for storage, or other similar uses; and 
(e)  The planning commission may impose reasonable requirements which would effect the interests of the public health safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3.26, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-33—22-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-51. - Districts listed. 
The City of Cairo is hereby divided into classes of zoning districts known as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 548, § 4.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-52. - Limited use (L.U.) provision. 
The city establishes the "limited use" provision for the purpose of allowing an applicant to request that a certain property be classified as a limited use. In some areas of the city, a particular land use activity selected out of a general zoning classification may have less community impact than some of the other uses within that classification. For this reason, an applicant may request a rezoning petition to limit the use of a proposed property to a specified use only (i.e., C1-LU). To wit: Neighborhood commercial district limited to a "beauty shop". The limited use must be among the uses permitted in the zone district for which the limited use is taken. In the event that the conditions for which the limited use zoning was granted is violated, the property would revert to the prior zoning classification. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 4.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-53. - Official zoning map. 
The boundaries of these districts are shown on the map which is designated as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Cairo. The official zoning map is on file in the office of the building official and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effects as if said zoning map and all such notations, references and other information shown there were fully set forth or described herein. 
Except where reference on said zoning map to a street or other designated line is made by dimensions shown on said map, the district boundary lines follow lot lines of the center lines of the streets or alleys, or such lines extended and the corporate limits of the city as they existed at the time of adoption of this chapter. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the zoning map, the mayor and city council shall rule on such boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 4.03, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-54—22-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1AA SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-61. - Statement of purpose. 
This single-family residential district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for low density single-family dwelling units. For the R-1AA single-family residential district, the specific intent is: 
(a)  To encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for low density single-family residential development within the city. 
(b)  To discourage land uses which would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 5.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-62. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings, except manufactured and mobile homes. 
(b)  Industrialized buildings (modular homes/units). 
(c)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(d)  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not in the front yard and/or closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 5.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-63. - Conditional uses, and their attendant educational and recreational facilities and public schools. 
(a)  Churches and their attendant educational and recreational facilities, and public schools, provided that: 
(1)  Adequate ingress and egress to a major street is assured. 
(2)  They are provided with adequate, paved off-street parking areas. 
(3)  The buildings are placed not less than thirty (30) feet from street lines and not less than twenty-five (25) feet from property lines, and that the proposed site is not less than one (1) acre. 
(4)  Adequate provisions are made for maintaining a planted buffer strip along adjoining property lines. 
(b)  Cemeteries, provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application. 
(c)  Clubs and lodges not operating for profit provided that: 
(1)  The buildings are not placed closer than fifty (50) feet to any property lines; and 
(2)  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide along the side and rear lot lines. 
(d)  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
(e)  Hospitals and clinics. 
(f)  Home occupations—Home occupations as limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(g)  Family day care homes (family day care homes as limited and defined in section 22-5) provided that no play equipment be located in the front yard and that signage be compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All state licensing requirements and regulations shall also apply. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(i)  Bed and breakfasts—Bed and breakfasts as limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(j)  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas. 
(k)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 5.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 715, § 1, 1-28-10) 
Sec. 22-64. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321.) 
(Ord. No. 548, § 5.04, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-65—22-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1A, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-76. - Statement of purpose. 
This single-family residential district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for low density single-family dwelling units. For the R-1A single-family residential district, the specific intent is: 
(a)  To encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for low density single-family residential development within the city. 
(b)  To discourage land uses which would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 6.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-77. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings, except manufactured and mobile homes. 
(b)  Industrialized buildings (modular homes/units). 
(c)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(d)  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not in the front yard and/or closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 6.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-78. - Conditional uses, and their attendant educational and recreational facilities and public schools. 
(a)  Churches and their attendant educational and recreational facilities, and public schools, provided that: 
(1)  Adequate ingress and egress to a major street is assured. 
(2)  They are provided with adequate, paved off-street parking areas. 
(3)  The buildings are placed not less than thirty (30) feet from street lines and not less than twenty-five (25) feet from property lines and that the proposed site is not less than one (1) acre. 
(4)  Adequate provisions are made for maintaining a planted buffer strip along adjoining property lines. 
(b)  Cemeteries, provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application. 
(c)  Clubs and lodges not operating for profit provided that: 
(1)  The buildings are not placed closer than fifty (50) feet to any property lines; and 
(2)  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide along the side and rear lot lines. 
(d)  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
(e)  Hospitals and clinics. 
(f)  Home occupations—Home occupations as limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(g)  Family day care homes (family day care homes as limited and defined in section 22-5) provided that no play equipment be located in the front yard and that signage be compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All state licensing requirements and regulations shall also apply. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(i)  Bed and breakfasts—Bed and breakfasts as limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(j)  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas. 
(k)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 6.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 715, § 2, 1-28-10) 
Sec. 22-79. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321.) 
(Ord. No. 548, § 6.04, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-80—22-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-91. - Statement of purpose. 
This single-family residential district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for low density single-family dwelling units. For the R-1 single-family residential district, the specific intent is: 
(a)  To encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for low density single-family residential development within the city. 
(b)  To discourage land uses which would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 7.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-92. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings, including manufactured homes. 
(b)  Industrialized buildings (modular homes/units). 
(c)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(d)  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not in the front yard and/or closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 7.02, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 644, § 4, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-93. - Conditional uses, and their attendant educational and recreational facilities and public schools. 
(a)  Churches and their attendant educational and recreational facilities, and public schools, provided that: 
(1)  Adequate ingress and egress to a major street is assured. 
(2)  They are provided with adequate, paved off-street parking areas. 
(3)  The buildings are placed not less than thirty (30) feet from street lines and not less than twenty-five (25) feet from property lines and that the proposed site is not less than one (1) acre. 
(4)  Adequate provisions are made for maintaining a planted buffer strip along adjoining property lines. 
(b)  Cemeteries, provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application. 
(c)  Clubs and lodges not operating for profit provided that: 
(1)  The buildings are not placed closer than fifty (50) feet to any property lines; and 
(2)  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide along the side and rear lot lines. 
(d)  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
(e)  Hospitals and clinics. 
(f)  Home occupations—Home occupations as limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(g)  Family day care homes (family day care homes as limited and defined in section 22-5) provided that no play equipment be located in the front yard and that signage be compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All state licensing requirements and regulations shall also apply. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(i)  Bed and breakfasts as limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(j)  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas. 
(k)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 7.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 715, § 3, 1-28-10) 
Sec. 22-94. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321.) 
(Ord. No. 548, § 7.04, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-95—22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-2, TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-101. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of the R-2 residential district is to provide for medium density residential development; to provide for variety in the city's housing stock, to encourage neighborhood maintenance and preservation by allowing the conversion of large and older single-family homes to two-family and apartment use; and to provide suitable areas for new multifamily development. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 8.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-102. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the R1AA, R1A, R-1 residential districts. 
(b)  Two-family (duplex) residential. 
(c)  Manufactured homes (See section 22-331 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 8.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-103. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Any use listed under section 22-63 of the R-1AA zoning district. 
(b)  Boarding house or rooming house. 
(c)  Public building, structures and other public land uses. 
(d)  Group day care homes (group day care homes as limited and defined in section 22-5) provided that no play equipment be located in the front yard and that signage be compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All state licensing requirements and regulations shall also apply. 
(e)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 8.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 4, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-104. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321.) 
(Ord. No. 548, § 8.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-105—22-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-3, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-116. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of the R-3 residential district is to provide for to high density residential development; to provide for variety in the city's housing stock, to encourage neighborhood maintenance and preservation by allowing the conversion of large and older single-family homes to apartment use; and to provide suitable areas for new multifamily development. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 9.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-117. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the R1AA, R1A, R-1 and R-2 residential districts. 
(b)  Multifamily (apartments and condominiums)* 
(c)  Townhouses (See section 22-151 et seq.). 
(d)  Manufactured homes (See section 22-331 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 9.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-118. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Any use listed under section 22-63 of the R-1AA zoning district. 
(b)  Nursing homes. 
(c)  Boarding house or rooming house. 
(d)  Group homes. 
(e)  Professional offices. 
(f)  Public building, structures and other public land uses. 
(g)  Group day care homes (group day care homes as limited and defined in section 22-5) provided that no play equipment be located in the front yard and that signage be compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All state licensing requirements and regulations shall also apply. 
(h)  Group personal care homes—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(i)  Manufactured home and travel trailer parks (See section 22-331 et seq.). 
(j)  Halfway homes—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(k)  Convalescent homes—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(l)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 9.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 5, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-119. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321.) 
*For development of apartment units of only one (1) apartment building on a given site. The R-PUD development standards section 22-131 et seq., will apply to apartments of more than one (1) building on a given parcel of lot. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 9.04, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-120—11-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - R-PUD, RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-131. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the intention of this section to provide areas of sufficient size and allowing reasonable flexibility in design and orientation for the establishment of a group of structures, which includes multiple dwellings designed in a planned unit development of more than one (1) building on a given development site. This includes but is not limited to cluster developments and zero lot line developments. 
Therefore, the zoning ordinance regulations relative to area, height, bulk and placement may, in the planned unit development district, be modified by the planning commission and mayor and city council, in the case of a plan for a large scale development which, in the judgment of the planning commission and mayor and city council, provides adequate open space and improvements for circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed, provided that in no case may the density of the proposed planned unit development exceed thirteen (13) dwelling units per acre and provided further than the minimum site size for the residential planned unit development is two (2) acres. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-132. - General procedures for PUD (R-PUD) approval. 
Any proposed property for PUD development must first be zoned to the R-PUD zoning classification. The PUD zoning procedure will generally follow the same procedures as other zoning requests. However, the applicant for PUD zoning shall submit a preliminary site development plan of the proposed development at the same time a petition for PUD zoning is made. 
No rezoning for PUD will be granted to a petitioner until the preliminary site plan is reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council, respecting other property rezoning criteria established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-133. - Permitted uses. 
In all R-PUD districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses: 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings, including manufactured homes. 
(b)  Duplexes. 
(c)  Townhouses (subject to the provisions of section 22-151 et seq.). 
(d)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(e)  Condominiums. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 644, § 5, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-134. - Conditional uses. 
Any use listed under section 22-118 of the R-3 zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-135. - Preliminary review. 
Preliminary review is recommended as an aid to both the developer and to the city. Under this procedure, a developer provides the information which is described below and the planning commission then acts on the information provided. This review is intended to serve as a guide for the immediate inspection of the planning commission, subject to a thorough study and analysis. Changes and additions which may have to be made before a mutual agreement is reached can be made at such time without excessive engineering or other costs to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-136. - Procedure for preliminary approval. 
An application shall be submitted to the planning commission by the owner or his/her authorized representative for approval of a preliminary site plan of any proposed development anticipated under the residential planned unit development (R-PUD) district provision of this chapter. Appropriate copies of the preliminary site plan at a scale not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing the following, shall be submitted with the application. 
(a)  The title under which the proposed development is to be recorded and the name of the present owner. 
(b)  Names of owners of adjacent property. 
(c)  A topographic map showing the general location of existing property lines, streets, alleys, buildings, easements, swamps, watercourses, and other physical site features which relate to the development. 
(d)  The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage. 
(e)  All proposed uses of the property to be developed shall be appropriately indicated on the plan. 
(f)  Date, North point and graphic scale. 
(g)  Other information required by the planning commission to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
The developer shall furnish to the planning commission a statement indicating the proposed use to which the development will be put, along with a description of the type of residential building and number of units contemplated. Upon receiving approval of the preliminary site plan, the developer may proceed to develop the final plan. No building permit shall be issued until approval of the final plan is given. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10.06, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-137. - Procedure for final plan approval. 
An application in writing shall be submitted to the planning commission by the owner or his/her authorized representative for approval of the final plan for any proposed development anticipated under the residential planned unit development district of this chapter. Appropriate copies of the final plan, at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing the following information shall be submitted with the application. 
(a)  The title under which the proposed development is to be recorded, the legal description of the land to be developed, the name of the present owner, and the name and address of the technical author of the plan. 
(b)  Names and owners of adjacent property and general information as to boundaries thereof as well as the existing zoning on such tracts. 
(c)  A map showing the location of existing property lines, the adjoining streets, alleys, buildings, drains, easements, watercourses, and other physical site features which relate to the development. 
(d)  The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and storm drains, and other engineering data required by the planning commission to clearly indicate the general design of said utility services. It shall be mandatory that the development use the city water and sewer services and that all streets in the development be paved in accordance with city standards. 
(e)  The size and capacity of existing sewer, water, storm drains, and thoroughfares in the area. 
(f)  The location and dimensions to the nearest foot of lots, building lines, alleys, easements, parks, and other public properties on the property to be developed. All lots in a preliminary plan shall be designated by consecutive numbers beginning with number one (1). 
(g)  All proposed uses of the property to be developed shall be indicated on the plan. 
(h)  Date, North point and graphic scale. 
(i)  Proposed development restrictions and/or protective covenants to be imposed upon the property after development. 
(j)  Bearings and distances of all courses of the exterior boundary of the proposed development and its area in acres to the third decimal place. 
(k)  The developer shall furnish to the planning commission a statement indicating the proposed use to which the development will be put, along with a description of the type of residential buildings and number of units contemplated, so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards or congestion of population. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10.07, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 122-138. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321.) 
(Ord. No. 548, § 10.08, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-139—22-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - R-TH, TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-151. - Statement of purpose. 
A townhouse development contains elements that are characteristic of both single-family and multifamily communities. Allowable density is comparable to that of multifamily dwellings, while the subdivision of land permits the fee simple sale of individual structures and lots. In permitting construction of townhouses, the mayor and city council intends: 
(a)  To encourage home ownership in the City of Cairo. 
(b)  To increase the variety of dwelling types in the local housing market. 
(c)  To encourage development or redevelopment of small parcels of property in suitable areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-152. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Townhouses. 
(b)  Condominiums. 
(c)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-153. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Public buildings, structures and other public land uses. 
(b)  Home occupations—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-154. - Area, placement and development requirements for townhouses. 
All townhouse developments must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A townhouse development shall be located on a site that measures a minimum of one-half (½) acre. 
(2)  Each townhouse interior lot shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width. Each townhouse lot located on a corner shall be at least forty-nine (49) feet in width. Each interior lot that is intended to be at the end of a row of townhouses shall be at least thirty-four (34) feet wide. Each lot shall contain two thousand eight hundred eighty (2,880) square feet of area or more (fifteen (15) units per gross acre). 
(3)  The setback from an interior side lot line shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet for the townhouse which is located at the end of a row of townhouses. A minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from any side street shall be maintained. Front yard setback will be no less than twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  An accessory building may abut an accessory building located on an adjacent lot in the townhouse development. 
(5)  Each townhouse dwelling unit shall contain at least eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area within outside walls exclusive of basements, unfinished attics, garages, porches, or other such areas not normally used for human habitation. 
(6)  No more than four (4) townhouses shall be built in a row having the same building line. In setting forth this requirement, the city intends to discourage the creation of long unbroken lines of townhouses. In a townhouse complex having more than four (4) dwelling units, the required minimum offset in the building line shall be three (3) feet. A row or grouping of townhouses shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet in length. 
(7)  Every townhouse lot shall have the required frontage on a public street. 
(8)  a.  A minimum of two (2) paved off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each townhouse. 
b.  Each lot shall have its own parking spaces with direct access to a public alley or street. Parking spaces and driveways are permitted in the front yard of a lot if a setback of fifty (50) feet is maintained and the front yard is properly landscaped as determined by the planning commission. 
c.  The off-street parking provided for a townhouse may have direct access to an alley only if the alley has a minimum right-of-way width of thirty (30) feet. 
(9)  Fire wall construction for a townhouse shall extend from the foundation to and through the roof. The wall shall be a twenty-four-inch fire wall extending four (4) feet beyond walls and roofs. The fire wall extension requirement will be maintained for future enlargement of the townhouse unit. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-155. - Preliminary review. 
Preliminary review is an aid to both the developer and the city. Under this procedure, a developer provides the information which is described in section 22-156 and the planning commission and mayor and city council then act on the information provided. This review is intended to serve as a guide for the immediate inspection of the city officials, subject to a thorough study and analysis. Changes and additions which may have to be made before a mutual agreement is reached, can be made at such time, without excessive costs to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-156. - Procedure for preliminary approval. 
An application in writing shall be submitted to the planning commission by the owner or the authorized representative for approval of a preliminary plan of any proposed development anticipated under the townhouse district provision of this chapter. Appropriate copies of the preliminary plan at a scale not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing the following, shall be submitted by the applicant. 
(a)  The title under which the proposed development is to be recorded and the name of the present owner. 
(b)  Names of owners of adjacent property. 
(c)  A topographic map showing the general location of existing property lines, streets, alleys, buildings, easements, watercourses, and other physical site features which relate to the development. 
(d)  All proposed uses of the property to be developed shall be indicated on the plan including landscaping. 
(e)  The location and layout of all proposed residential units. 
(f)  Date, North point and graphic scale. 
The developer shall furnish to the planning commission a description of the type of residential building and number of units contemplated. Upon receiving approval of the preliminary plan, the developer may proceed to develop the final plan. No building permit shall be issued until approval of the final plan is reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11.06, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-157. - Procedure for final plan approval. 
An application in writing shall be submitted by the owner or the authorized representative for approval of the final plan for any proposed development anticipated under the townhouse district of this chapter. Appropriate copies of the final plan, at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, showing the following information shall be submitted with the application: 
(a)  The title under which the proposed development is to be recorded, the legal description of the land to be developed, the name of the present owner, and the name and address of the technical author of the plan. 
(b)  Names of adjacent property owners. 
(c)  A topographic area map showing the location of existing property lines, with existing and proposed elevations, the adjoining street, alleys, buildings, drains, easements, watercourses, and other physical site features which relate to the development. 
(d)  The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage, and other engineering data required by the city council to clearly indicate the general design of said utility services. It shall be mandatory that the development use the city water and sewer services and that all streets in the development be paved. 
(e)  The location and dimensions of lots, building lines, alleys, easements, parks and other public properties on the property to be developed. 
(f)  All proposed uses of the property to be developed shall be indicated on the plan including landscaping. 
(g)  Date, north point and graphic scale. 
(h)  Proposed development restrictions and/or protective covenants to be imposed upon the property after development. 
(i)  Bearings and distances of all courses of the exterior boundary of the proposed development and its area in areas to the third decimal place. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11.07, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-158. - Rezoning of any property for townhouse development will follow established rezoning policies and procedures. 
Additionally, no rezoning of property for townhouses will be effected until preliminary development plans have been reviewed and approved for the proposed site. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 11.08, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-159—22-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - C-1A RESTRICTED OFFICE-INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-171. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of this district is to encourage and provide suitable areas within the city for offices, businesses, institutional and related activities with a minimum of interference from excess traffic and conflicting land uses. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 12.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-172. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Professional offices (including accountant, architect, attorney, doctor, marriage/family therapists, engineer, land surveyor, embalmer, and funeral director), insurance agent, real estate agent, hospitals, clinics (other than veterinary) and clinic laboratories, nursing/rest homes, group homes, convalescent homes, and personal care homes. 
(b)  Pharmacies, florist shops, mortuaries. 
(c)  Day care facilities as limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(d)  Adult care facilities. 
(e)  Financial institutions. 
(f)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 12.02, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 6, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-173. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Barber shops, beauty shops, tanning bed salons, massage therapy, seamstress, and similar personal service establishments. 
(b)  Churches. (See section 22-63(a)) 
(c)  Public buildings, structures and other public land uses. 
(d)  Retail sales of goods and services. 
(e)  Boarding house or rooming house. 
(f)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 12.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 7, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-174. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 12.04, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-175—11-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - C-1, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-186. - Statement of purpose. 
The neighborhood commercial district is intended to permit retail business and service uses which are needed to serve nearby residential areas. In order to promote such business development uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. The intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of local business areas in locations which possess the mutual advantages of both the consumers and merchants, and thereby promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 13.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-187. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(b)  Clubs and lodges. (Section 22-63(c)). 
(c)  Dance/music instruction or martial arts instruction, limited to six (6) students at a time. 
(d)  Day care centers (day care centers as limited and defined in section 22-5) provided that no play equipment be located in the front yard and that signage be compatible to the neighborhood and not larger than regulated for home occupations. All state and licensing requirements shall also apply. 
(e)  Mortuary/funeral home. 
(f)  Photography studio. 
(g)  Professional offices including accountant, architect, attorney, doctor, marriage/family therapist, engineer, land surveyor, embalmer, funeral director, hospitals, clinics (other than veterinary) and clinic laboratories, nursing/rest homes, group homes, convalescent homes, and personal care homes. 
(h)  Restaurants, in existing structures with no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor space devoted to such use. 
(i)  Small personal service establishments such as barber/beauty shops, tanning salons, massage therapy, laundry or dry cleaning, dressmaker/tailor shop, clothing rental, health club, shoe repair, clock/watch repair, or services of a similar nature. 
(j)  Small retail businesses selling convenience goods and serving the adjacent residential neighborhoods such as drug, food, and bakery shops. 
(k)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 13.02, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 8, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-188. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Churches, or other religious institutions. (See section 22-63(a)). 
(b)  Service stations. 
(c)  Convenience store. 
(d)  Antique store. 
(e)  Adult care facilities. 
(f)  Congregate personal care homes—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(g)  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas. 
(h)  Commercial radio, television, and other transmitting or relay stations. 
(i)  Boarding or rooming house. 
(j)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 13.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 9, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-189. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for C-1 districts adjacent to residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in section 22-22, Protective screening of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 13.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-190. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, Section 22-321). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 13.05, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-191—22-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - CBD, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-201. - Statement of purpose. 
The CBD central business district is intended to project and promote suitable areas for business and commercial uses which benefit from proximity to each other, to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to a central business area, and to encourage the intensive development of a centralized business center for the city. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 14.01, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 3-26-01) 
Sec. 22-202. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use listed under section 22-187 of the C-1 zoning district. 
(b)  Retail business and service establishments. 
(c)  Financial institutions. 
(d)  Commercial planned unit developments in accordance with provisions of section 22-231 et seq. 
(e)  Community use. (As defined in section 22-5). 
(f)  Hotels/motels. 
(g)  Dance/music instruction, martial arts instruction. 
(h)  Loft dwellings—See section 22-204. 
(i)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted and approved by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 14.02, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 10, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 699, § 2, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 22-203. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Churches and other religious institutions. (Section 22-63(a)). 
(b)  Clinics, convalescent homes and nursing homes. 
(c)  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
(d)  Multiple-family residential dwellings, boarding or rooming houses. 
(e)  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas and/or towers. 
(f)  Quick-service food stores—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(g)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 14.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-204. - Permitted residences in the central business district (CBD). 
Loft dwelling residential uses are permitted in existing buildings and existing multistory commercial buildings or constructed multistory commercial buildings so long as their plans are submitted and approved by the city planning commission and mayor and city council. The following minimum requirements shall be met prior to approval: 
(1)  Minimum floor space requirements and maximum number of occupants shall comply with the building codes. 
(2)  Building codes: All loft dwelling residential renovations shall comply with all existing commercial building codes and fire codes with fire walls. 
(3)  Restrictions: 
a.  All window treatment must be off-white colors with no signs, drawings or photographs incorporated therein. Nothing shall hang from the outside of the windows. 
b.  No outside mailboxes shall be permitted; inside mail boxes or mail slots shall be used. 
c.  No outside television or radio antennas or satellite reception dishes shall be permitted unless they are less than thirty-six (36) inches and are located on roof or such a way as not to be visible from street; cable connections shall be permitted and located at the rear of the establishments. 
d.  No daily or weekly boarding rooms shall be permitted, only complete dwelling units as defined herein. 
e.  Outside building identification numbers shall not exceed six (6) inches in height. 
f.  No drying of clothes shall be permitted on the outside of the building. 
g.  Entry to the unit or to a hallway serving one (1) or more units shall be provided by a stairway opening directly to the outside at street level. All stairways shall be enclosed. No unit shall occupy street level frontage. 
h.  All window air-conditioning units shall not be visible from any public street. 
i.  No washing or waxing of vehicles shall be permitted. 
j.  No recreation, entertainment, public gathering or placement of furniture shall be allowed on the sidewalks unless permitted by mayor and city council. 
k.  No sales of the type commonly known as garage sales, yard sales, or estate sales shall be allowed. 
(4)  Parking: 
a.  Each residential unit shall have its own off-street parking space with direct access to a public alley or street between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday). Public parking may only be used to meet this requirement with prior approval of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 14.04, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 5-29-08) 
Sec. 22-205. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening for requirements of CBD, central business district adjacent to or near residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in section 22-22. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 14.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-206. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 14.06, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-207. - Signs. 
(In accordance with the provisions of section 22-401, Sign regulations in the CBD central business district). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 14.07, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-208—22-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - C-2, HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-216. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of the C-2, highway commercial district is to provide for and encourage appropriate development along the city's major streets which will include a variety of sales and services that will both accommodate the needs of the city and the traveling public. Adequate off-street parking, adequate building setbacks and reduction of traffic hazards are prime city objectives for business development along the city's major streets. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 15.01, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 3-26-01) 
Sec. 22-217. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  All permitted uses in the C-1A, C-1 and CBD zoning districts, except loft dwellings. 
(b)  Automobile sales and auto service. 
(c)  Service stations. 
(d)  Agricultural implement sales and service. 
(e)  Wholesale stores, storage buildings, warehouses, mini-warehouses, distributing plants, freezers and lockers. 
(f)  Small fabrication and manufacturing shops, when employing not more than ten (10) employees in the office and manufacturing operations. 
(g)  Monument and statuary sales. 
(h)  Manufactured housing sales. 
(i)  Outdoor furniture and equipment. 
(j)  Tent and canopy sales. 
(k)  Swimming pools and hot tub sales. 
(l)  Trade shops including sheet metal, roofing, upholstering, electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning, cabinet making and carpentry, rug and carpet sales and cleaning, and sign painting, provided that all operations are conducted entirely within the building. 
(m)  Shopping centers. 
(n)  Museums. 
(o)  Gas stations/mini-marts—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(p)  Quick-service food stores—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(q)  Flea market, indoor only. 
(r)  Game room, no alcohol. 
(s)  Restaurants. 
(t)  Commercial radio, television, and other transmitting or relay stations. 
(u)  Garage, carport, storage building sales. 
(v)  Boat, bicycle, motorcycle, lawnmower, and trailer sales/service. 
(w)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 15.02, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 11, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-218. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  All conditional uses in the C-1 and CBD zoning districts. 
(b)  Cemeteries. (Section 22-63 (b)). 
(c)  Churches and other religious institutions. (22-63(a)). 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
(f)  Open air business—not specifically allowed as permitted uses in section 22-217 and as limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(g)  Flea market, outdoor (a planted natural buffer strip of at least ten (10) feet wide along the side and rear lot lines is required). 
(h)  Junk yards provided that protective screenings are provided. (See section 22-22, Protective screenings). 
(i)  Adult entertainment businesses. 
(j)  Nightclub, bar, dance hall. 
(k)  Tattoo parlor. 
(l)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 15.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 12, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 716, § 1, 1-28-10) 
Sec. 22-219. - Protective screening. 
Protective screening requirements of C-2, highway commercial district adjacent to or near residential districts shall be incompliance with the regulations set forth in section 22-22, Protective screenings. All outdoor sales areas are subjected to establishing a planted and maintained natural buffer strip of at least twenty (20) feet in width and six (6) feet in height on side and rear lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 15.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-220. - Area and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 15.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-221. - Procedures for site plan project approval. 
In connection with all of the above uses, a site plan of the proposed development shall be furnished to the planning commission showing the location of buildings, roads, parking areas, open areas, sidewalks, landscaping, buffers, lighting, etc., the planning commission shall have final authority on those projects listed under section 22-217, whereas mayor and city council shall have final say on those projects listed under section 22-218. 
NOTE: All plans shall be submitted two (2) weeks prior to the regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 15.06, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-222—22-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - C-PUD, COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-231. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the intention of this section to provide areas of sufficient size and allowing reasonable flexibility in design and orientation for the establishment of a structure or group of structures which include one (1) or more retail sales, service and office enterprises on a single parcel of land. 
Within the commercial planned unit development districts, the regulations set forth in this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 16.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-232. - Permitted uses. 
Any use permitted in non-residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 16.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-233. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Churches and other religious institutions. (Section 22-63(a)). 
(b)  Medical facilities, nursing homes, group homes and personal care homes. 
(c)  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 16.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-234. - Procedure for project approval. 
In connection with all of the above uses, the following requirements shall be complied with before any building permit is issued. The developer shall furnish the building official with appropriate copies of the letter of intent and the development plans for any use permitted in the commercial planned unit development district, drawn to scale, showing the general location of all buildings, roads, parking area, open areas, sidewalks and street lighting. Typical elevations of all four (4) sides of the proposed building, proposed number of units by type and floor space, shall be submitted (e.g., furniture sales, eight hundred (800) square feet). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 16.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-235. - Procedure for preliminary and final approval. 
(Shall be in compliance with section 22-132, General procedures for planned unit development approval). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 16.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-236. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the attached schedule of regulations, section 22-321). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 16.06, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-237—22-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - I-1, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-246. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of this district is to permit certain industries which are of a light manufacturing character to locate in planned areas of the city, so that such uses may be integrated with land use, such as commercial and residential areas. It is further intended that these light industrial uses will act as a transition between heavier industrial uses and non-industrial uses. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 17.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-247. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in commercial zone districts, except loft dwellings. 
(b)  Bakeries, baking plant, wholesalers, etc. 
(c)  Bottling or packaging of cleaning compounds, polishes, seeds, etc. 
(d)  Building equipment, building materials, lumber, sand, gravel yards, and yards for contracting equipment, maintenance or operating equipment of public agencies, or public utilities, or materials or equipment of similar nature. 
(e)  Carpet manufacturing. 
(f)  Carpenter and cabinet-making shops. 
(g)  Cold storage plants. 
(h)  Dental, surgical and optical goods manufacturing. 
(i)  Electronic manufacturing and assembly parts. 
(j)  Electric motors and generators manufacturing. 
(k)  Research and testing laboratories. 
(l)  Pharmaceutical products manufacturing. 
(m)  Printing, engraving and bookbinding shops. 
(n)  Soft drink bottling establishments. 
(o)  Tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
(p)  Processed agricultural products other than meat, poultry or animal products. 
(q)  Textiles, wearing apparel manufacturing. 
(r)  Natural gas and petroleum products storage. 
(s)  Plastic product manufacturing, but not including the processing of the raw materials. 
(t)  Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards and public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings and substations, gas regulator stations. 
(u)  Electrical, glazing, heating, painting, paper hanging, plumbing, roofing or ventilation contractors' establishments including outside storage yards. 
(v)  Moving or storage offices and warehouse. 
(w)  Publicly owned buildings, structures or public utility buildings and service yards including storage yards. 
(x)  Caretaker or employee residence—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(y)  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas and/or towers. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 17.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-248. - Conditional uses. 
Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 17.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-249. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321). *Within any I-1 light industrial zoning district, the following special regulations will apply to all permitted uses: 
(1)  All open portions of any lot shall be suitably graded and, except when paved or similarly improved, they shall as a minimum, be seeded and maintained in grass. Preferably, such open spaces may be further landscaped with trees, shrubs and ground cover. 
(2)  All service drives and access roads and parking areas shall be paved. 
(3)  All storage operations shall be fully enclosed. 
(4)  Provisions shall be made for the adequate lighting of all parking areas and service drives. 
(5)  Satisfactory provisions shall be made for storm drainage, sanitary sewerage and water supply. As much as possible, all power and telephone lines shall be provided for by easements along rear and side lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 17.04, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-250—22-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - I-2, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-261. - Statement of purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for the development in desirable areas of the city, of those heavy commercial and industrial establishments which may create some nuisance and which are not properly associated with or compatible with any of the development proposed for the other districts. These uses are primarily of a manufacturing, assembling, and fabricating nature. Reasonable regulations apply to uses in this district so as to permit the location of industries which will not cause adverse effects on residential and commercial areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 18.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-262. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in I-1 Light Industrial zoning district. 
(b)  All other uses of a manufacturing or processing nature except those subject to conditional approval. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 18.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-263. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Machinery assembly plants. 
(b)  Canning factories. 
(c)  Chemical plants. 
(d)  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster or parts manufacturing, corrosive acid or alkali manufacture. 
(e)  Incineration of garbage or refuse. 
(f)  Metal stamping and pressing plants. 
(g)  Smelting of any ferrous of non-ferrous metal. 
(h)  Stock yards, slaughter houses and meat packing plants. 
(i)  Reformatories, prisons, correctional or penal institutions, but not including prison farms. 
(j)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 18.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-264. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule of Regulations, section 22-321). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 18.04, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-265—22-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - AG, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-276. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of the agricultural district within the city is to provide for continuing agricultural related development where the present application of non-agricultural related zoning controls would be unreasonable or premature. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 19.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-277. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Agriculture related activities. 
(b)  Single-family detached dwellings, including manufactured homes. 
(c)  Industrialized buildings (modular homes/unit). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 19.02, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 644, § 6, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-278. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Animal hospitals. 
(b)  Animal kennels. 
(c)  Churches. (Section 22-63 (a)) 
(d)  Cemeteries. (Section 22-63 (b)) 
(e)  Public buildings, structures or other public land uses. 
(f)  Home occupations—As limited and defined in section 22-5. 
(g)  Rodeos, cattle shows, horse shows, animal exhibitions. 
(h)  All radio, cellular phone, or similar transmission/receiving antennas and/or towers. 
(i)  Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood and environment as interpreted by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 19.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-279. - Area, height and placement requirements. 
(In accordance with the Schedule or Regulations, section 22-321). 
(Ord. No. 548, § 19.04, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-280—22-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISIONS 17—19. - RESERVED 

Secs. 22-291—22-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 20. - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-321. - Area, height and placement requirements. 

 
References: 
1 Refer to section 22-131 et seq. 
2 Refer to section 22-151 et seq. 
3 Refer to section 22-231 et seq. 
(a) Property line/zero lot line development 
(Ord. No. 548, Art. XXIII, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 785, 8-22-16) 
Secs. 22-322—22-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Manufactured and mobile homes, Ch. 23. 

Sec. 22-331. - Statement of purpose. 
These regulations shall govern the location and occupancy of manufactured homes within the city. All manufactured homes located within and outside of manufactured home parks and all travel parks shall be governed by the regulations within this article. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 20.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-332. - General provisions. 
(a)  Building and construction code compliance. 
(1)  Age limit. No mobile home or manufactured home more than ten (10) years of age shall be placed on a lot within the municipal limits of the City of Cairo, except upon approval by the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall establish procedures and standards so as to permit mayor and council to make uniform decisions regarding the exceptions. 
(2)  HUD approval. All manufactured homes placed within the municipal limits of the city shall bear an insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) certifying that the unit has been inspected and is constructed in conformance with the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards in effect on the date of manufacture. 
(3)  Compliance with codes and ordinances of the city. All manufactured homes placed within the city shall be in compliance with all other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city. 
(b)  Utilities and services. 
(1)  Electrical. All electrical work and wiring done on manufactured homes located within the city and served by the electrical distribution system shall be under the rules and regulations as published in the Code and promulgated by the governing authority and under the direction of the electrical inspector. 
(2)  Water and sewer. All plumbing done on manufactured homes located within the city shall be under the rules and regulations as published in the Code and as promulgated by the governing authority and under the direction of the plumbing inspector. Provided, however, that prior to the permanent occupancy of a manufactured home within the city such home shall be connected to an approved water source and an approved sewage system in such a manner as to comply with state adopted building codes, insofar as they are applicable. 
(c)  Fire and safety. 
(1)  Rules and regulations. All manufactured homes shall be under rules and regulations as published in the Code for fire prevention and any such rules and regulations promulgated by the governing authority. Said rules and regulations to be administered under the direction of the city fire marshall and building officials. 
(2)  Safety tie-downs required. All manufactured homes placed on a lot for permanent occupancy within the municipal limits of the city shall be attached with tie-downs, in such a manner as to comply with the requirements set forth in mobile home tie down standards of the standard building code. 
(3)  Skirting. At the time of installation, all manufactured homes within the city must have installed a skirting which completely encloses the undercarriage. For those homes located within manufactured home parks, acceptable materials include masonry, stone, and may include metal or other materials compatible with the siding of the particular manufactured home unit. All manufactured homes located outside of manufactured home parks must have installed a permanent masonry skirting. Masonry material must be used if any part of such manufactured home is over thirty (30) inches from ground level regardless of location. The city building official must approve all skirting. 
(4)  Foundations. All manufactured homes placed within the city for permanent occupancy shall be placed on approved permanent foundations and constructed according to state adopted building codes, insofar as they are applicable. The city building official will inspect foundations. 
(5)  Undercarriage. The undercarriage (wheels, axles, tires, and tongue) shall be removed from each manufactured home placed for permanent residency on a residential lot. 
(d)  Permits and fees. 
(1)  Building permit required. All manufactured homes intended for placement on a lot within the city must first obtain a building permit and in so doing comply with all applicable regulations of the code. Such permit shall be valid for a period of three (3) months and shall be accompanied by a plat showing the approved location of the home or proposed construction. 
(2)  Additions. Any additions to a manufactured home or accessory building constructed on a lot shall comply with the requirements of the building, electrical, plumbing, and gas codes. 
(3)  Inspection approval. Before a certificate of occupancy is issued, the required permits and inspection approval must be obtained from the building department. 
(4)  Fees. There shall be charged and collected by the city such fees and costs as are authorized by the code or as promulgated by the governing authority for the permits, inspections, and services provided by the city in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 20.02, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 644, § 1, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 668, § 1, 8-27-07) 
Sec. 22-333. - Travel trailers: General requirements. 
Any travel trailer located within the city shall meet the following general requirements: 
(a)  Occupancy. For sites specifically designed for travel trailers within travel trailer parks, the residential occupancy of a travel trailer shall be limited to a short term occupancy of one hundred eighty (180) days. Each travel trailer shall be owned by its occupant as no rental travel trailers shall be permitted. 
(b)  Storage. Travel trailers, when stored on a residential lot, shall be located at least ten (10) feet from adjoining property lines and at least ten (10) feet from any residence unless stored within a portion of the dwelling or accessory structure. No plumbing facilities (both water and sewerage) in such trailers may be connected while they are stored. Storage of same on public rights-of-way is hereby prohibited. When a travel trailer is stored on a lot in any residential district it shall not be utilized as a residence or occupied by household members, their guests, or as a rental unit. 
(c)  Density. A maximum of eight (8) travel trailer stands per acre is allowed. 
(d)  Walks. 
1.  General requirements: All travel trailer park developments shall be provided with safe and convenient, pedestrian accesses of adequate width for their intended use and same shall be durable and convenient to maintain. 
2.  Common walk system: A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a minimum width of three and one-half (3½) feet. 
3.  Individual walk: All travel trailer stands shall be connected to common walks, or to streets, or to driveways, or to parking spaces. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two (2) feet. 
(e)  Travel trailer parks: Each travel trailer park development shall be required to be provided with the following minimum accommodations: 
1.  Interior street access: Each stand shall be provided with access frontage of at least twenty (20) feet. 
2.  Electric power supply: Each stand shall be provided with a properly grounded, waterproofed electrical receptacle. A properly sized over-current device shall be installed as a part of each power outlet. Said fixtures shall meet the standards established by applicable city codes. 
3.  Stand identification: A property and street number designation or other appropriate numbering device properly identifying each travel stand shall be placed at the interior side lot line at a point ten (10) to fifteen (15) feet from the interior road system of the park. Such device shall be clearly visible from the street and shall be embossed with reflectorized glaze for the numbers. Such numbers shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in height. 
4.  Each stand shall be constructed so that same shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system. 
5.  All access streets shall be paved or have a prepared all-weather surface as may be determined by the city building inspector according to the quantity of traffic that will be using the street. The design of such access streets shall be consistent with the requirements of the city regarding access and site distance. 
6.  Each stand shall be constructed so that same shall be connected to the city water supply system. A fire hydrant shall be placed so that all stands located within the travel trailer park are within four hundred (400) feet of an operating fire hydrant. 
7.  All water, sewer, or gas line shall be buried a minimum of eighteen (18) inches below the finished ground surface of the travel trailer park. Each stand shall have an adequate valve system so as to permit disconnection of utility service to the travel trailer. If overhead service lines are provided within the travel trailer park, such line shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet above the grade of interior streets and placed so that no wires extend over a travel trailer parking stand. 
8.  All recreation areas, park entrances, park streets, and pedestrian easements shall be illuminated to provide at least three-tenths ( 3/10 ) footcandle of lighting. 
9.  Construction and operation of the trailer park shall permit garbage and refuge service shall conform with all city ordinances. 
10.  All public dedicated easements shall be of proper size for their respective intended purpose and shall be provided within the travel trailer park to permit adequate service of travel trailer stands. 
11.  There shall be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet of green buffer space between the travel trailer park and city streets or adjacent land owners. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 20.03, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 709, § 1, 5-11-09) 
Sec. 22-334. - Travel trailer parks: Accessory uses permitted. 
The following establishments of a commercial nature may be permitted as customary accessory uses in a travel trailer park, provided such uses do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the area of the park, are located a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet from any adjoining property line or street or highway right-of-way, and are primarily intended for the convenience of and service to the occupants of the park: 
(a)  Coin-operated laundry. 
(b)  Coin-operated vending machines of types allowed under applicable codes of the city, provided such are located within a building and are not visible from the street or from adjoining property lines. 
(c)  One (1) or more signs identifying the name of the park and the services provided therein; signs regulating traffic or provided for the convenience and welfare of park residents. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 20.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-335. - Manufactured home parks: General requirements. 
All manufactured home parks located within the city shall meet the following general requirements: 
(a)  Establishment of manufactured home parks. 
(1)  From and after the adoption of this chapter [Ordinance No. 548], each proposed manufactured home park development shall be presented in site plan form by the developer to the planning commission/mayor and city council for review and approval and shall conform to the minimum design and improvement standards required herein. Site development plans of the proposed manufactured home park shall include at least the following items: 
a.  A site plan at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equal to fifty (50) feet. 
b.  The title under which the developer is to be recorded, the legal description of the land to be developed, the name of the present owner and the name and address of the technical author of the plan. 
c.  All property lines and dimensions; the location and dimensions of each building and unit. 
d.  The layout and location of off-street parking, total number of spaces, ingress and egress lanes, pedestrian ways, sidewalks and curb lines. 
e.  The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage and other data as may be required to clearly indicate the general design of said utility services. 
f.  All proposed uses of property and buildings to be developed shall be indicated on the plan. 
(2)  No private construction or public improvements shall commence on any land to be used as a manufactured home park prior to the approval and certification of the required development plans. 
(3)  A person, firm or corporation desiring to develop a manufactured home park within the city shall provide appropriate copies of a sketch plan of a proposed layout which shall conform to the minimum requirements stated herein and shall file said copies of said sketch plan with the planning commission for review. 
(b)  Expansions of manufactured home parks. A person, firm or corporation desiring to expand a manufactured home park to include more manufactured homes or manufactured home sites, shall submit plans and specifications for such improvements to the planning commission for review prior to initiating construction and improvements. 
(c)  Design. The design of a manufactured home park shall conform to the following design requirements: 
(1)  Setback. The manufactured home park shall be so designed that manufactured homes (and travel trailers) and their accessory structures shall be a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet from adjoining property lines, ten (10) feet from internal park streets and at least twenty-five (25) feet from any publicly dedicated street. Manufactured home stands shall be designed so as to provide a distance of at least thirty (30) feet between manufactured homes. 
(2)  Access. The manufactured home park shall front upon a public street. Each manufactured home site and its parking area shall have direct access to the internal street system of the park. 
(3)  Streets. Streets within a manufactured home park shall be privately owned, privately constructed and privately maintained. Such private streets shall be well drained and provided with a hard surface treatment with a minimum surface of ten (10) feet for one-way streets and twenty (20) feet for two-way streets. 
(4)  Parking. Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. Parking on interior streets within a park is hereby prohibited. The required front yard may be used for the minimum parking. 
(5)  Minimum area of tract. A manufactured home park shall have a minimum size of five (5) acres. 
(6)  Length of residential occupancy. No space within a manufactured home park shall be rented for residential use of a manufactured home except for periods of thirty (30) days or longer. 
(7)  Manufactured home inspections. It shall be the initial responsibility of each manufactured home or trailer park operator to notify the building official to inspect manufactured homes being placed within the confines of any park under this jurisdiction, control or supervisions, for compliance with the provisions of this article, prior to the placement of any such manufactured home on its stand and within such park and to the connection of utility services to and occupancy of the manufactured home. 
(8)  Issuance of permit. At least once each year, the building official at his/her convenience shall inspect each manufactured home park and the manufactured home units within said parks to determine that same are in full compliance with the codes of the city. The building official shall issue a permit for such use for each manufactured home park and each manufactured home unit which in the course of each such inspection he/she finds to be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and such permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of its issue. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 20.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-336. - Manufactured home parks: Improvements. 
Manufactured home parks constructed or reconstructed within the city shall be provided by the developer with the following minimum improvements: 
(a)  Sewage: The manufactured home park shall be provided with an approval sewage collection system. 
(b)  Water: A potable water supply shall be provided by the park operator. If city water is available at the proposed site, water service shall be connected to the systems and fire hydrants shall be placed within four hundred (400) feet of each manufactured home stand. If the proposed park is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public system, the owner or developer shall promptly enter into negotiations to receive service and shall take all steps necessary to promptly obtain same. 
(c)  Easement: Public dedicated easements of proper size for their respective intended purpose shall be provided within the park if individual manufactured home strands and accessory park uses are to be serviced by a public utility system. 
(d)  Utility placement: All water, sewer or gas lines shall be buried a minimum of eighteen (18) inches below the finished ground surface of the manufactured home park and shall be provided with adequate valve systems to follow the cutoff of utility service to a manufactured home space at the manufactured home space and at the entrance of the utility service from the space to the trunk line of the utility system. If overhead service lines are provided within the park, such lines shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet above the grade of interior streets and so placed that no wires extend over a manufactured home space. 
(e)  Lighting: All recreation areas, park entrances, park streets and pedestrian easements shall be illuminated to provide at least three-tenths (0.3) footcandles of lighting, 
(f)  Garbage and refuse: Garbage and refuse service shall conform with all city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 20.06, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-337. - Nonconforming manufactured home parks. 
Any nonconforming manufactured home park in the city which becomes vacant and remains unoccupied due to abandonment or discontinuance for a period of six (6) months shall not begin new operations until the park is brought into compliance with these regulations. All nonconforming manufactured home parks which are in existence on the effective date of this chapter, shall be required to meet all the conditions set forth in this article within one (1) year from the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 20.07, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-338. - Area, placement, and development requirements for manufactured homes. 
(a)  Location of manufactured homes. 
(1)  All manufactured homes (single- or double-wide) will be permitted only in R-1, single-family residential districts; R-2, two-family residential districts; or R-3, multiple-family residential districts. 
(2)  Manufactured homes (single- or double-wide) will be permitted in R-1, single family residential districts, provided the same must be at least seven hundred (700) square feet in size. 
(3)  Manufactured homes (single- or double-wide) of less than seven hundred (700) square feet in size will only be permitted in manufactured home parks. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 20.08, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 644, § 2, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 709, § 2, 5-11-09) 
Sec. 22-339. - Approval procedures. 
The procedures set forth for approval of a PUD Development as set forth in sections 22-135 to 22-138 shall be applicable to travel trailer parks. 
(Ord. No. 709, § 3, 5-11-09) 
Secs. 22-340—22-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 

Sec. 22-351. - Generally. 
Any lawful use of the land or buildings existing at the date of passage of this chapter and located in a district in which it would not be permitted as a new use under the regulations of this chapter is hereby declared to be a "nonconforming use" and not in violation of this chapter at the date of adoption of this chapter; provided, however, that a nonconforming use shall be subject to, and the owner shall comply with, the regulations set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 548, Art. XXI, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-352. - Nonconforming use, continuation of use. 
The nonconforming use of land, which exists when this chapter becomes effective, may be continued provided that: 
(a)  No such nonconforming use shall in any way be expanded or extended. 
(b)  If such nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for twelve (12) months or changed, any future use of such use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 21.01, 1-8-01) 
Cross reference— Continuing nonconforming use, generally, § 22-13. 
Sec. 22-353. - Restoration. 
Any building which houses a nonconforming use which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, Act of God, or by public enemy to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value, exclusive of the foundation at the time such damage occurred, shall thereafter be made to conform with provisions of this chapter except if that building shall have an age of more than one hundred (100) years, which building, if rebuilt or restored, shall be substantially restored to the same appearance as before the damage occurred provided, however, that a building permit to initiate restoration must be obtained within six (6) months of the occurrence of damage; otherwise, the provisions of section 22-13 will apply. If such damage is less than fifty (50) percent of its market value before said damage occurred, exclusive of the foundation, then such structure may be restored to the same non-conforming use as existed before such damage occurred. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 21.02, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 605, § 2, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 22-354. - Discontinuance or abandonment. 
Any nonconforming use of land or building which has become vacant or remains unoccupied owing to abandonment or discontinuance for a period of twelve (12) months shall thereafter conform to the provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 21.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-355. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
There may be a change in tenancy, ownership, or management of an existing nonconforming use, provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 21.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-356. - Change of use. 
A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 21.05, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-357—22-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-366. - Scope of article. 
Except as provided in this article, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the planfor such building, improvements, or use, a plot showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-367. - Parking spaces may not be reduced. 
Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-368. - Drainage, construction and maintenance. 
All off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt, or a pervious surface may be permitted as deemed appropriate by the planning commission and final approval by mayor and city council. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof, in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-369. - Separation from walkways, sidewalks and streets. 
All off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. Curbing and other protection devices must be set back a minimum of three (3) feet to prevent vehicle overhang. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-370. - Parking area design. 
Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and length of eighteen (18) feet. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet wide where used with ninety (90) degree angle parking, at least eighteen (18) feet wide where used with sixty (60) degree angle parking, at least thirteen (13) feet wide where used with forty-five (45) degree parking, and at least twelve (12) feet wide where used with parallel parking, or where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least twenty (20) feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-371. - Joint parking facilities. 
Two (2) or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types may provide joint facilities provided the number of off-street parking spaces are not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.06, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-372. - Pavement markings and signs. 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided in each travel way wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.07, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-373. - Number of parking spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this chapter, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based only upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.08, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-374. - Street parking requirements. 
In all zoning districts, off-street parking spaces for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, or enlarged after the effective date of this chapter, shall be provided as herein prescribed. 
Required parking spaces shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces is provided elsewhere in conformance with this chapter. The owner or owners of a building structure of other land use requiring off-street parking spaces must show, to the satisfaction of the city manager, that he/she is the record title holder of the property devoted to said principal land use and of the property proposed for off-street parking use, or that he/she is the lessee of such property. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.09, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-375. - Planted areas. 
Any off-street parking facility of ten (10) cars or more shall also provide the equivalent of one (1) parking space per each ten (10) cars and each faction thereof, to be planted with at least one (1) tree with a minimum diameter (measured at the location of its greatest width) of one and one-half (1½) inches, and grass and/or ground cover. The exact location within the parking facility is optional with each design, but the planted area herein referred to shall be in addition to perimeter buffer strips and to other landscaping on the property outside the parking facility. 
The purpose of this requirement is to aid in providing visual definition, oxygenation, shade, wind modulation, drainage absorption and relief from other problems as may result form total coverage paving. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.10, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-376. - Location of parking space for other land uses. 
The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the permitted use requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility to the building to be served. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.11, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-377. - Off-street parking standards. 

 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.12, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-378. - Off-street loading requirements. 
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt of distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot of adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets and alleys. 
Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet, with fifteen-foot high clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule: 

 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.13, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-379. - Minimum number of loading spaces required. 
Industrial, wholesale and rental operations shall provide space as follows: 
(1)  Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
(2)  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unpark within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.14, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-380. - Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) general parking standards. 
(1)  The city encourages the placement of handicap parking spaces at each off-street parking lot and at selected on-street parking locations. Any business shall install the appropriate sign(s) and painted spaces. 
(2)  Each parking space reserved for the disabled shall be painted and have a sign as per the requirements set out in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices." 
(3)  For all buildings considered "public", at least one (1) accessible walk having no steps or abrupt changes in level, and complying with all criteria specified within this ordinance, shall be provided from the parking spaces for disabled people into each accessible primary building entrance. Accessible walks shall also be provided between buildings on a common site. Doors swinging onto or away from walks shall have level areas. Walk surfaces shall be stable, firm, and of sufficient texture to resist slippage. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.15, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-381. - Parking spaces and passenger loading zones for disabled persons. 
(1)  A safe place, located either on or off the street, shall be designated for handicapped passengers to get into and out of cars. It shall be: 
(a)  As near as possible to the building entrance provided for the handicapped. 
(b)  Zoned to prohibit parking. 
(c)  Provided with a ramp to the sidewalk level, if located at a curbside. 
PARKING SPACES AND PASSENGER LOADING ZONES FOR HANDICAPPED 

 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.16, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-382. - Disabled parking for places of assembly. 
Disabled parking for places of assembly [shall be as follows:] 

 
Spaces shall be: 
(1)  As near as possible to the building entrance provided for the handicapped with a maximum travel distance of two hundred (200) feet. 
(2)  Identified (wheelchair symbol) and controlled for use by individuals with physical disabilities. 
(3)  A minimum of nine (9) feet in width, with a four (4) foot wide pedestrian access aisle on one (1) side of the space. 
(4)  Spaces shall be substantially level ( 1/8 inch per foot slope for drainage), suitable for wheeling and walking, and accessible to the building by a clear, level or ramped path of travel. 
(Note: Spaces parallel to a curb (four (4) inches high maximum) on the building side of the parking area are desirable. If perpendicular parking is necessary, four (4) foot wide access aisles between every other bay will be required.) 
(Ord. No. 548, § 22.17, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 22-383—22-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 755, adopted Feb. 10, 2014, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 22-391—22-409, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 548, §§ 23.01—23.19, adopted Jan. 8, 2001; Ord. No. 614, § 1, adopted June 14, 2004; and Ord. No. 697, adopted June 26, 2008. 

Sec. 22-391. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Animated sign shall mean a sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. This definition includes any signs that electronically change the sign face, whether by substitution of copy or scrolling. An electronic sign that maintains a steady sign face without change for no less than six (6) hours is not considered an animated sign; however, any deviation from the minimum six-hour change of results in the sign being considered an animated sign. 
Area of a sign/sign area shall mean the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one (1) face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Awning sign shall mean a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Billboard sign shall mean any sign with a sign area exceeding one hundred (100) square feet. 
Double-faced sign shall mean a sign which has two (2) display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less, where one (1) face is designed to be seen from one (1) direction and the other face from another direction. 
Ground sign shall mean a freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Illuminated sign shall mean a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Nonconforming sign shall mean any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this article that was legal at the time of its erection. 
Parcel shall mean a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Portable sign shall mean any sign that is not permanently affixed. 
Roof sign shall mean a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building which extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building. 
Sign shall mean a device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 
Temporary sign shall mean a sign on a nonpermanent nature. All such signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after the purpose of which the sign is intended to advertise has been accomplished. 
Wall sign shall mean a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Window sign shall mean a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-392. - Permits. 
(a)  All signs allowed by this article, except those exempted from obtaining a permit shall require a permit issued by the city prior to posting, displaying, substantially changing, or erecting a sign in the city. 
(b)  Existing signs which conform to the provisions of this article that would be required to obtain a permit under the regulations of this article must register with the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 22-393. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-393. - Application information. 
Applications for sign permits required by this article shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the office of code enforcement. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property, drawn to scale, showing all existing structures, including existing signage. 
(2)  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel at the time application is made. 
(3)  The name(s) and address(es) of all of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(4)  The consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
(5)  The name, address, the phone number of the sign contractor. 
(6)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected. 
(7)  The distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. 
(8)  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-394. - Time for consideration. 
The city shall process all sign permit applications within thirty (30) business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and accompanying sign permit fee. The office of code enforcement shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by first class mail, to the address on the permit application on or before the thirtieth business day after the city's receipt of the completed application and fee. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the thirty (30) business day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-395. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, are incomplete applications, or applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the office of code enforcement shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by first class mail or via hand delivery to the address on the permit application on or before the thirtieth business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and the applicant is granted a public hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city. The applicant will be given ten (10) days' written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application, or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this article, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal. An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the office of code enforcement upon filing of written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) business days of the hearing officer's decision. Such appeal shall be considered by the mayor and council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received before 4:00 p.m. of the fifth day prior to the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at such meeting, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting of mayor and council thereafter. The mayor and council shall make a final decision no later than twenty (20) days from the date of the hearing. 
(c)  [Petition.] In the event an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the mayor and council, he or she may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-396. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed in accordance with the permit application within six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-397. - Fees. 
The cost of a permit shall be as determined by the city manager subject to review and alteration by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-398. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Roof signs; 
(2)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs; 
(3)  Window signs which exceed thirty (30) percent of the window area; 
(4)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80; 
(5)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hide from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign; 
(6)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing; 
(7)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic; and 
(8)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curb, utility pole, or other structure except as set forth herein. 
(9)  Portable signs. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-399. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts. 
(a)  Within residential areas zoned R-1AA, R-1A, R-1, and R-2 there shall be no signs having an aggregate sign area greater than twelve (12) square feet nor violating the requirements set forth in [subsections] (b)(2)—(7). Signs having a height of greater than five (5) feet above the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located shall not be located in residential zoning districts. Signs meeting the standards of this section are exempt from permitting requirements. Further, signs within residential areas shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  There shall be no general advertising sign. 
(2)  No sign that projects from the building shall be larger than twenty-five (25) square feet. 
(3)  Each sign shall be compatible with adjoining signs and shall not compete for attention. 
(4)  There shall be no animated signs. 
(5)  No sign shall be closer than thirty-six (36) inches to the adjacent property lines. 
(b)  Central business district (CBD). Each permitted business within the CBD may have two (2) permanent signs. The signs may be a window sign, crossing sign, ground sign or wall sign subject to restrictions within the sign ordinance. The signs within the CBD shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Each permitted business within the CBD may have two (2) permanent signs in the form of identification, window signs, awning signs, or a combination of thereof. Structures that are located on a corner so as to face two (2) streets may have one (1) additional sign. Said additional sign shall be no larger than seventy (70) percent of the largest sign. 
(2)  There shall be no general advertising sign. 
(3)  No sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size. 
(4)  No sign that projects from the building shall be larger than twenty-five (25) square feet. 
(5)  Each sign shall be compatible with adjoining signs and shall not compete for attention. 
(6)  There shall be no animated signs. 
(7)  No sign shall be closer than twenty-four (24) inches to the adjacent property lines. 
(8)  No sign shall obscure any significant architectural feature of the building or site. 
(9)  All signs shall be appropriate for an early twentieth century southern town. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-400. - Height requirements. 
The following height requirements shall be applicable to signs located in nonresidential zoning districts: 
(1)  No ground sign shall exceed eighteen (18) feet in height at the highest point on the sign. 
(2)  All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the center line of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-401. - General size and location requirements in nonresidential districts. 
(a)  No freestanding sign may be located within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
(b)  No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Billboard signs. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall not exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height or twenty (20) feet in length. 
(2)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(3)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways and shall be oriented only towards those highways. 
(4)  No billboard sign shall be located within [a] one-thousand-three-hundred-foot radius of another billboard sign, measured from the closest points on each sign. 
(5)  No billboard sign shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a single-family residence upon a lot zoned residential. 
(6)  No billboard sign shall be located within five hundred (500) feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within five hundred (500) feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the five-hundred-foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery. 
(7)  No billboard sign shall be erected to a height in excess of thirty-six (36) feet. 
(8)  Billboard signs shall be allowed to utilize multiple message technology to the extent permitted by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(d)  Ground signs. Ground signs shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure, and shall be limited to one (1) such sign per parcel per street frontage. 
(e)  Wall and awning signs. 
(1)  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. 
(2)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than six (6) feet. 
(3)  Wall and awning signs shall not exceed a sign area of two hundred (200) square feet or twenty (20) percent of the wall face of the premises to which the sign relates, whichever is less, on each street facing wall. 
(4)  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(5)  Each building tenant shall be limited to one (1) wall or awning sign on each street facing wall. 
(f)  Maximum aggregate sign area. Parcels may contain more than one (1) freestanding sign, provided that: 
(1)  Parcels exceeding three (3) acres shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of three hundred (300) square feet for the entire parcel. 
(2)  Parcels less than three (3) acres but greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of one hundred eighty (180) square feet for the entire parcel. 
(3)  Parcels less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet for the entire parcel. 
(4)  These limits shall not include the area of any wall signs, window signs or billboard signs located on the parcel. 
(5)  These limits shall include the area of all ground signs on the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-402. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required under this article shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city building code. 
(b)  Signs for which a permit is not required under this article that are constructed of degradable material may be posted for a maximum of sixty (60) days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any such replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-403. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place, provided that within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article the owner of the nonconforming sign or the owner's agent registers the sign with the city. Such registration shall contain the information listed in [this article] and shall specify the sign being registered as nonconforming and shall state that the sign was completely installed before the effective date of this article. The payment of a fee is not required for the registration of a nonconforming sign; however failure to register shall be considered an offense and may be punished as any other ordinance violation. Nonconforming signs shall be permitted until one (1) of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; or 
(2)  The sign has been damaged by circumstances beyond the control of the owner to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign; provided that signs damaged by Act of God and not due to the owner's action may be restored to their predamaged condition, provided that the useful life of the signs is not extended. 
(b)  No structural repairs except those permitted pursuant to subsection (a)(2) above change in shape, size or design, shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this article. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-404. - Variances. 
Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this article shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, existing buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
b.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; and such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. 
(2)  Variance applications shall be submitted to the city council and shall be heard under the same time frames and rules governing appeals under this article. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-405. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
(a)  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article: 
(1)  Nonilluminated signs, having a sign area of less than fifteen (15) square feet, provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Window signs installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the available window space. 
(3)  Numerals displayed for purposes of identifying property location and not exceeding four (4) inches in height in residential districts and ten (10) inches in height in nonresidential districts. 
(4)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public right-of-way that are erected for a maximum period of thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 3-24-14) 
Sec. 22-406. - Illumination. 
Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. An illuminated sign shall not flash or simulate movement. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 22-407. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give the permittee thirty (30) days to rectify the condition or remove the dilapidated sign before issuing a citation. 
(b)  The city may issue a citation for violation of this article by any sign erected, altered, converted, or used in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be liable for a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation. Each day a sign is posted in violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 2-10-14; Ord. No. 757, § 2, 3-24-14) 
Secs. 22-408—22-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTY 

Sec. 22-421. - Enforcement. 
The zoning administrator shall enforce this chapter, and is hereby given the authority and responsibility to enforce all provisions of this chapter under the direction of the city manager which includes but is not limited to the following duties: 
(a)  To serve as a liaison between the Cairo Planning Commission and the mayor and city council keeping each body advised of pending actions pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  To serve as a non-voting ex-officio member of the Cairo Planning Commission to provide technical assistance in matters relating to zoning requests. 
(c)  To maintain in a timely and current manner the official zoning map reflecting thereon any and all rezoning amendments approved by mayor and council. Amendments of the official zoning map will be recorded by the zoning administrator within seven (7) calendar days following approval of such action by mayor and city council. 
(d)  To perform any other zoning duties as directed by mayor and city council and city manager. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-422. - Permits. 
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permits: 
(a)  Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for, or construction of any building structure, or moving of any existing building without first obtaining a building permit from the building official. No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or remodeling of any building or structure until an application has been submitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, showing that the construction proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the building codes. 
No plumbing, electrical, drainage or other permit shall be issued until the building inspector has determined that the plans and designated use indicate that the structure and premises, if constructed as planned and proposed, will conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.02, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-423. - Certificates of occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any land, building or structure for which a building permit is required, and to use or permit to be used any building or structure hereafter altered, extended, erected, repaired, or moved, until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy stating that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
(a)  Certificate validity. The certificate of occupancy as required for new construction of, or renovations to existing buildings and structures, in the building code, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Certificates for existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Temporary certificates. Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued for a part of a building or structure prior to the occupation of the entire building or structure, provided that such temporary certificate of occupancy shall not remain in force more than six (6) months, nor more than five (5) days after the building or structure is fully completed and ready for occupancy and, provided further, that such portions of the building or structure are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Records of certificates. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the office of the building official, and copies of such certificates of occupancy shall be furnished upon request to a person or persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(e)  Certificates for accessory buildings to dwellings. Accessory buildings or structures to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy, but rather may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling, building or structure on the same lot when such accessory buildings or structures are completed at the same time as the principal use. 
(f)  Application for certificates. Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such building shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions and requirements of this chapter. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such refusal and the cause thereof within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.03, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-424. - Fees. 
Fees for inspections and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the building official in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. 
The amount of such fees shall be established by the mayor and city council, from time to time, and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from the enforcement of this chapter. The fees shall be deposited with the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.04, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-425. - Amendments. 
The mayor and city council may amend, supplement or change the regulations of the district boundaries of this chapter as established herein. The procedure for submitting a request for an amendment to the zoning chapter text or district boundaries of the official zoning map shall be as follows: 
(a)  The applicant shall complete and submit to the zoning administrator a rezoning application not less than thirty (30) days prior to the next scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(b)  At the time of application submittal, the applicant shall deposit the appropriate fee amount with the zoning administrator to cover the cost of processing the application. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days of the next scheduled planning commission meeting, the zoning administrator shall compile all of the rezoning requests for the next scheduled meeting. This agenda shall be mailed to all planning commission members. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.05, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-426. - Zoning policies and procedures. 
The following policies and procedures are herein established to provide guidelines for the following zoning activities: 
(a)  The adoption of a new city zoning ordinance. 
(b)  The adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance (text amendment). 
(c)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance (map amendment) which rezones property from one zoning classification to another. 
(d)  The procedural requirements for zoning amendments sponsored by the City of Cairo. 
(e)  The procedural requirements for zoning amendments sponsored by a private citizen or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.06, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-427. - Policies and procedures for city initiated zoning activities. 
(a)  In the case of developing an initial zoning plan (map and text), or updating or amending an existing zoning plan, the Cairo Planning Commission and the mayor and city council will, where appropriate, utilize any new or existing land use studies, land use plans or other relevant documents as a resource for ordinance development or ordinance amendment. 
(b)  Upon the completion of a preliminary zoning document(s) by the planning commission and after the draft document has been presented to and reviewed by the mayor and city council, public hearings will be scheduled by both the Cairo Planning Commission and the mayor and city council, respectively. The official public hearing will be held by mayor and city council, and public notice will be given no less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days prior to the official hearing date. 
(c)  Public hearing notices will be published in the local paper. The public notice will state the time, place, and purposes of the hearing. 
(d)  When the boundary lines of an established zoning district are proposed for change, (rezoning) the mayor and city council shall have the Cairo Planning Commission prepare an evaluation of each such proposed rezoning considering each of the following factors: 
ZONING CRITERIA 
(1)  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property. 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the present zoning restrictions. 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values, resulting from existing zoning of specific parcels promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner by the proposed zoning classification. 
(5)  The suitability of the subject property for the zoning purposes as proposed. 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant under the present zoning classification, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property. 
(7)  Conformity with or divergence from the city's land use plan. 
(e)  The public hearings will be convened at the advertised time and place and will be presided over by the appropriate officials. 
(f)  The presider of each respective public hearing will review for those present, the following operating procedures for the public hearing: 
(1)  In order for a person in attendance to speak, the chair must recognize him/her. The person recognized will identify himself/herself. The chair may also request that the person furnish a home or business street address, as appropriate. 
(2)  A minimum of ten (10) minutes per side (proponents and opponents) will be allowed for discussion. The applicant or an authorized representative of the applicant will be given the option of speaking first at the hearing. 
(3)  Additional persons will be recognized per the above procedure for the purpose of addressing additional concerns of the revisions or to make additional points with regard to elements already addressed, but not to rehash points already made. 
(4)  Appropriate notes or minutes will be recorded by the mayor and city council and the planning commission at their respective public hearings. 
(g)  The Cairo Planning Commission shall prepare and submit the necessary minutes, evaluations and or recommendations to the mayor and city council prior to the mayor and city council's public hearing. 
(h)  The mayor and city council, at its official public hearing, will review the evaluations and recommendations from the planning commission and may choose to adopt or reject or modify the planning commission recommendations, or the business may be tabled for additional study to the next regular council meeting with the consent of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.07, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-428. - Procedures for rezoning request made by a private citizen/property owner. 
(a)  An application for rezoning must be filed with the zoning administrator at City Hall on a prescribed form and a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) paid. 
(b)  All applications for rezoning requests will be accompanied by a plat of the parcel in question or a legal description. If the parcel's boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within an existing subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of the county, then the lot block, and subdivision designation with appropriate plat references and a copy of the deed to the land so described as required above. 
(c)  The zoning administrator will inform applicant of the public hearing dates. Although, the Cairo Planning Commission will convene a public hearing on each proposal, the official public hearing will be held by the mayor and city council and public notice will appear no less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days of the official public hearing. 
(d)  The public hearing notice will name the applicant, the location of property to be affected, the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning class and the date, time and place of both the planning commission public hearing and the public hearing held by the mayor and city council. 
(e)  The zoning administrator shall have erected upon the property for which rezoning is to be considered a sign of no less than seventeen by twenty-four (17 × 24) inches announcing the public hearings, stipulating the dates, times, and places for the two (2) hearings, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification. The sign shall be clearly visible from a public street. It shall be erected not less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing date. 
(f)  The public hearing held by the planning commission will follow essentially the same meeting procedures as that of the mayor and city council, as provided for in section 22-427(f) through (h). 
(g)  Any application for rezoning of a particular parcel of property which is denied by the mayor and city council may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least twelve (12) months immediately following the first defeat of the rezoning request; then may not again be considered until the expiration of at least sixty (60) months immediately following the defeat any subsequent rezoning request. 
(h)  When a proposed zoning relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a public hearing shall be held on the proposed action. Such public hearing shall be held at least six (6) months and not more than nine (9) months prior to the date of final action on the zoning decision. A notice shall be posted on the affected premises in the manner prescribed by this Code section. The published public hearing notice shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.08, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 642, § 13, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 22-429. - Conditional uses. 
The planning commission shall hear and recommend after a public hearing conditional uses as authorized. The application to establish a conditional use shall be approved on finding by the mayor and city council that: 
(a)  The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use of development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood not affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers. 
(c)  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement, noise or fumes generation, or type of physical activity. 
(d)  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses; and the proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use. 
(e)  The parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted have been met. 
(f)  Provided, that the city council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided that wherever the city council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any term, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted, are not being complied with, said council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.09, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-430. - Variances. 
The planning commission shall have the power to authorize upon appeal such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where a literal enforcement of the zoning requirements would result in undue hardship. 
(1)  Procedure: Applications for variance shall be filed with the office of the zoning administrator; such applications must be filed thirty (30) days before the date of the following planning commission meeting in order that the required public notice may be given before the next scheduled meeting. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
a.  General location of the existing structures and property lines; and 
b.  Location of the proposed buildings and land uses; and 
c.  Setbacks if applicable to the request. 
(2)  Public hearing: A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission for the review of an application for a variance. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Cairo. 
(3)  Fee: Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to partially defray administrative costs. 
(4)  Conditions and limitations: The planning commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.10, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 3-26-01) 
Sec. 22-431. - Criteria for the consideration of variance requests. 
The following criteria shall be utilized when considering specific cases where the variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship so that the spirit of this chapter [the zoning ordinance] shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such a variance may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon the finding of the planning commission that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question and because of its size, shape or topography; and 
(2)  The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create an undue hardship; and 
(3)  Such conditions are particular to the particular piece of property involved and not the making of the applicant; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this chapter; and 
(5)  The proposed use will be of such location, size, and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding neighborhood; and 
(6)  The proposed use will be of a nature that will make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district involved; and 
(7)  The location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of operation of any such proposed use will be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance emanating from the use which might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby permitted uses whether by reason of dust, noises, fumes, vibration, smoke, or lights; and 
(8)  The location and height of buildings or structures and the location, nature and height of walls and fences will be such that the proposed use will not interfere with or discourage appropriate development and the use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.11, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-432. - Appeals. 
An appeal by a person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau may be taken to the mayor and city council where it [is] alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the office of the zoning administrator or other administrative official in the enforcement and interpretation of this chapter. Such appeals shall be made within thirty (30) days of the administrative action by filing with the Cairo Zoning Administrator and the mayor and city council a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. If the notice of appeal is not filed within thirty (30) days, the only recourse shall be a court of record. 
The zoning administrator shall then transmit to the mayor and city council all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. The appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the mayor and city council that after the notice of appeals has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the notice, a stay would in the zoning administrator's opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, other than by a restraining order, which may, be granted by a court of record. 
The mayor and city council shall fix a reasonable amount of time for the hearing of an appeal and shall give due notice to the parties concerned including all landowners within three hundred (300) feet of the premises in question. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners at the address given on the last assessment roll. The mayor and city council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable period of time with regard to the purpose of the ordinance [provision]. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or agent. 
In the event that the petitioner for an appeal remains discontented with the mayor and city council's decision on an appeal application, the petitioner shall have thirty (30) days to appeal the action to the superior court system. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.12, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-433. - Fees. 
Fees for the administration, inspections, submittal of rezoning, variance or conditional use applications and the issuance of permits or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the zoning administrator in advance of the issuance of such permits. 
The fee for a rezoning, variance or conditional use application shall be established by the mayor and city council to cover the cost of the administration, inspection, and supervision resulting from the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 24.12, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-434. - Interpretation of chapter, purpose and conflict. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comforts, prosperity, and general welfare. 
It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, or abrogate, or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, and likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with, or abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction or requires larger open spaces, or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 25.01, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 22-435. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imposition of the appropriate fine or by imprisonment at the discretion of the municipal court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 25.01, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 642, § 14, 8-14-06) 
Chapter 24 - PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Acquisition by city of parks and recreational sites covered by subdivisions, § 19-47. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Entering city parks and recreation areas after hours. 
Various real property owned by the City of Cairo may be made available for public use as a recreational or social gathering area. Such areas shall be closed to the public from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Any such person who violates this provision by going upon the city owned property or recreation area following posting of the notice of hours of closing or following having been advised of the hours of closing by employees of the city shall be guilty of loitering as set forth within section 15-9 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 3, 11-8-93) 
Cross reference— Loitering generally, § 15-9. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1965 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1965 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1965 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1965 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1965 Code. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 

 