CODE OF THE CITY OF PALMETTO, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: May 7, 1990  Effective: May 7, 1990 
____________ 
Published in 1990 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PALMETTO, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
J. Clark Boddie 
Mayor 
____________ 
A. W. Amanns 
Joyce K. Baker 
Wilhelmenia Clark 
Victor M. Lee 
Thomas L. Morrow 
Larry D. Parrott 
Council Members 
____________ 
William H. Shell 
City Administrator 
____________ 
McNally, Fox, Mahler, Cameron, & Stephens 
City Attorney 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PALMETTO, GEORGIA 
____________ 
John O. Miller 
Mayor 
____________ 
Lorraine Allen 
Mike Basaric 
Natalie McFadden 
Laura Mullis 
Gregory Rusch 
Leon Sumlin 
Council Members 
____________ 
Terry L. Todd 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Cynthia Hanson 
City Clerk 
____________ 
McNally, Fox, Grant & Davenport 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Palmetto, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1977 Code, as supplemented through May 1, 1978, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Mayor and Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This Code was under the direct supervision of Roger Merriam, Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Code Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mayor J. Clark Boddie, City Administrator William H. Shell and City Attorney Robert Mark Mahler for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 90-04 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF PALMETTO, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PALMETTO, AND IT IS HEREBY ENACTED PURSUANT TO THE AUTHORITY OF THE SAME: 
Section 1. The Code entitled The Code of the City of Palmetto, published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 25, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 31, 1989, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by any combination thereof. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 31, 1989, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption May 7th, 1990. 
Enacted this 7th day of May, 1990. 
MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PALMETTO 

ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city charter, being Acts 1966, p. 2771, as amended is published in this part. History notes show the source of amendments. The charter has been printed in a style (capitalization, treatment of numbers, etc.) consistent with that of the new Code. In addition, obvious spelling errors have been corrected and the word "Section" has been abbreviated "Sec." in catchlines. All other changes are shown in brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - [IN GENERAL] 

Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the City of Palmetto as its corporate limits now exist, or shall hereafter be established as provided by law, shall continue in perpetuity as a body corporate and politic known as the City of Palmetto. All of the corporate rights, privileges, powers, duties, liabilities, and obligations imposed by law upon said corporate body shall continue of full force and effect except as otherwise altered herein. All property rights of whatever nature held, owned or possessed by the City of Palmetto shall be preserved unto said city unless otherwise provided by this charter. The present elected officials shall remain vested of their titles and authority until such time as they are succeeded or reelected as provided herein. 
Sec. 2.1. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Palmetto shall extend three-fourths of a mile in each direction from the center of the location of the water tank of the Atlanta and West Point Railroad as located in 1920. 
The corporate limits shall also include all that tract or parcel of land located in Land Lots 3 and 4 of the 7th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
To find the point of beginning, commence at the corner of Land Lots 3, 4, 29 and 30 of the 7th District of Fulton County, being the junction of the northeast corner of Land Lot 3, the southeast corner of Land Lot 4, the southwest corner of Land Lot 29 and the northwest corner of Land Lot 30; thence proceed south 0°58′45″ west 400 feet to a point; thence south 88°58′45″ west a distance of 200 feet to a point; thence south 32°6′20″ west a distance of 316.2 feet to a point; thence south 59°48′ west a distance of 913.4 feet to a point; thence south 0°52′50″ west a distance of 650.1 feet to a point; thence north 89°14′10″ west a distance of 300.2 feet to a point; thence north 30°27′30″ west a distance of 1074.4 feet to a point; thence north 89°19′20″ west a distance of 660 feet to a point; thence north 0°42′10″ east a distance of 163 feet to the center of Cedar Creek and the point of beginning. From the point of beginning thus established, proceed south 0°42′10″ west a distance of 163 feet to a point; thence south 89°19′20″ east a distance of 660 feet to a point; thence south 30°27′30″ east a distance of 1074.4 feet to a point; thence south 89°14′10″ east a distance of 300.2 feet to a point; thence north 0°52′50″ east a distance of 650.1 feet to a point; thence north 59°48′ east a distance of 913.4 feet to a point; thence north 32°06′20″ east a distance of 316.2 feet to a point; thence north 88°58′45″ east a distance of 200 feet to a point; thence north 0°58′45″ east a distance of 1175 feet to a point; thence north 87°14′08″ west a distance of 650 feet to a point; thence north 19°13′20″ west a distance of 650 feet to a point; thence north 08°17′50″ east a distance of 770.2 feet to a point; thence north 51°58′30″ west a distance of 349.8 feet to a point; thence south 14°54′50″ west a distance of 818.9 feet to a point; thence south 01°56′20″ west a distance of 650 feet to a point; thence north 88°07′20″ west a distance of 300 feet to a point; thence north 37°27′10″ west a distance of 600 feet to a point; thence north 01°34′ east a distance of 596.7 feet to a point; thence north 88°26′ west a distance of 300 feet to a point; thence south 01°33′50″ west a distance of 1909.3 feet to a point; thence south 89°18′50″ west 250.4 feet to a point; thence south 89°16′38″ west 845.5 feet to a point; thence south 0°33′22″ east a distance of 30 feet to a point; thence north 89°16′38″ east a distance of 840 feet to a point; thence south 0°41′44″ west a distance of 674.4 feet to the center of Cedar Creek; thence in a northeasterly direction up the center of Cedar Creek a distance of approximately 253 feet to the point of beginning. 
The corporate limits of the City of Palmetto shall also include the following described property: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 68, 92, 93, 100, 101 and 124 of the 7th District of Fulton County, being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at that point where the northern right-of-way of Roosevelt Highway intersects with the present city limits of the City of Palmetto in Land Lot 68 and traveling thence in a northeasterly direction along the present north right-of-way of Roosevelt Highway to that point at which the northern right-of-way of Roosevelt Highway intersects with the northern boundary of Land Lot 124; thence in an easterly direction following the northern land lot line of 124 to the eastern boundary of Land Lot 124 where said land lot forms a corner with Land Lots 123, 133 and 134; thence in a southerly direction following the eastern boundary of Land Lot 124 to the southeastern corner of Land Lot 124, where said land lot intersects with and forms a corner with Land Lots 125, 132 and 133; thence in a westerly direction along the southern boundaries of Land Lots 124 and 101 to a point at which the southern boundary of Land Lot 101 intersects with the western right-of-way of Bowen Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the western right-of-way of Bowen Road to a point where the western right-of-way of Bowen Road intersects with the northern right-of-way of Johnson Road; thence following the curvature of the northern right-of-way of Johnson Road in a westerly direction to a point where the north side of the right-of-way of Johnson Road intersects the present corporate city limits of the City of Palmetto; thence northwest and northwesterly along the present corporate limits of the City of Palmetto, following the curvature thereof, to the point of beginning. 
Less and except all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 93 and 100 of the 7th District of Fulton County and being lots now or formerly owned by Gerald L. Thompson and Rebecca Lee Thompson, and more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point where the center line of Johnson Road intersects the line dividing Land Lots 93 and 100 and running thence westerly along the centerline of Johnson Road a distance of 1092 feet to a point; thence north 724 feet to a point; thence west 259 feet to a point; thence north 1094 feet to the center of a branch; thence easterly along the centerline of said branch 87 feet and continuing southeasterly along the meanderings of said branch 1243 feet, more or less, to the line dividing Land Lots 93 and 100; thence easterly 1240 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Bowen Road; thence southerly along said centerline 930 feet to a point; thence west 320 feet to a point; thence south 154 feet to the centerline of Johnson Road; thence southwesterly and westerly along the centerline of Johnson Road 1054 feet, more or less, to the land lot line to the point of beginning. 
This tract is more particularly described in deed from Nancy Lee Carswell to Gerald L. Thompson and Rebecca Lee Thompson recorded in Deed Book 6864, p. 429, Fulton County records; 
Also, less and except all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 100 of the 7th District of originally Coweta, then Campbell, now Fulton County, Georgia, and being lots now or formerly owned by Gerald L. Thompson and Rebecca Lee Thompson, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of Bowen Road and Johnson Road, thence along the north side of Johnson Road in a southwesterly direction a distance of 344 feet; thence north a distance of 122 feet; thence east a distance of 320 feet to the west side of Bowen Road; thence south along the west side of Bowen Road a distance of 52 feet, said point being the point of beginning. 
This property is more particularly described in a deed from Lee, Watson & Watson to Thompson, recorded in Deed Book 6071, p. 80 of the Fulton County records; 
Also, less and except all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 93 of the 7th District of originally Campbell County, now Fulton County, Georgia, and being land now or formerly owned by Gerald L. Thompson and Rebecca Lee Thompson, being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point on the north side of the right-of-way of Johnson Road 160 feet west of the intersection of said east line of Land Lot 93 and the right-of-way of Johnson Road on the north side; running thence north parallel to the east line of Land Lot 93, a distance of 720 feet; thence west 285 feet to an iron pin; thence south parallel to the east line of Land Lot 93, a distance of 692.5 feet to the right-of-way of Johnson Road; thence east along the right-of-way of Johnson Road a distance of 285 feet to the point of beginning. 
Said tract is more particularly described in a deed from Alton D. Thompson, Jr. and Rebecca Lee Thompson to Gerald L. Thompson and Rebecca Lee Thompson and recorded in Deed Book 5965, p. 423 of the Fulton County records; 
Also, less and except all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Fulton County, Georgia, and being property now or formerly owned by James W. Parrott and Linda F. Parrott and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point in the center of Tatum Road at its intersection with the south, or southeast line of the right-of-way of the Atlanta and West Point Railroad, and running thence south 37°30′ east a distance of 350 feet along the center of Tatum Road; running thence south 16°45′ east a distance of 500 feet along Tatum Road; running thence south 28°30′ east a distance of 400 feet along the center of Tatum Road; running thence west 253 feet to an iron pin; running thence 27°15′ west along a fence a distance of 1130 feet, more or less, to an iron pin at the south or southeast line of the right-of-way of the Atlanta and West Point Railroad; running thence northeasterly along said right-of-way a distance of 252 feet, more or less to the center of Tatum Road and the point of beginning. 
Said tract is more particularly described in a deed from Flynt to Parrott and Parrott and recorded in Book 5050, page 68, Fulton County records. 
Also, less and except all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 68, District 7 of Fulton County and being property now or formerly owned by Velita R. Morris and being more particularly described as that lot being triangular in shape as formed by the southern right-of-way of Roosevelt Highway, the western right-of-way of State Highway 54 (Phipps Road) and the northeastern property line of a lot now or formerly owned by the Ramah Baptist Church. This lot is further identified as parcel number 07-3100-0069-065-9 of the Real Estate Atlas of Fulton County, Georgia, Map Volume, South Part 1, 12th Edition, Published 1982. 
(Acts 1983, p. 4110, § 1; Acts 1983, p. 4134, § 1) 
Sec. 3.1. - Establishment of city government. 
The corporate and governmental powers of the City of Palmetto shall be vested in a mayor and six (6) councilmen to be known as the "Mayor and Council of the City of Palmetto." The mayor and council shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city and shall exercise their powers in such manner as prescribed by this charter, the constitution and applicable general laws of the State of Georgia; or if not prescribed, in such manner as prescribed by duly established ordinances of the City of Palmetto. 
Sec. 4.1. - Powers, generally. 
The City of Palmetto shall have, and is hereby vested with, all powers granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution of Georgia and by the general statutes of Georgia applicable to such municipal corporation, and the enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall in no way act as a limitation on the city's authority to exercise such powers conferred on municipal corporations generally by the constitution or competent state authority. In addition to the express powers conferred by this charter, the Constitution of Georgia and the general statutes of this state, the city shall have such other powers as are necessarily or fairly implied from the express powers granted. 
Cumulative to all other powers, the City of Palmetto may adopt and use a common seal; contract and be contracted with; sue and be sued in any court of law, subject to the liabilities and immunities of municipal corporations generally under the laws of this state; plead and be impleaded; purchase, acquire, hold, own, accept by gift, lease or otherwise possess or enjoy any estate in property both real and personal, and may dispose of the same subject to this charter and the laws of general application to such municipal corporation. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE II. - [QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS OF MEMBERS OF GOVERNING BODY] 

Sec. 5.1. - Mayor; qualifications, term of office. 
To be eligible for the office of mayor a person must meet the requirements of a qualified elector for members of the General Assembly as prescribed by state law, must have been a bona fide resident of the City of Palmetto for one (1) year next preceding the election in which he offers as a candidate, and must have no debts outstanding against him in favor of the city. The term of office of mayor shall be two (2) years. If at any time after his election a mayor or mayor-elect shall be convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a crime involving moral turpitude the office shall be declared by the council to be vacant and shall be filled in the manner herein prescribed for filling vacancies occurring in the office of mayor or councilman. 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 93-02, resolved on March 1, 1993, stated that the provisions of § 5.1 of the Charter, relating to the mayor's qualifications and term of office, have been modified and are now controlled by the State of Georgia's uniform municipal election laws. 
State Law reference— Additional disqualifying factors, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-3-4, 21-3-5; controlling and contrary state law provisions, §§ 21-3-51, 21-3-63. 
Sec. 6.1. - Councilmen: Qualifications, terms of office. 
The qualifications for the office of councilman shall be the same as those prescribed for the office of mayor. The term of office of councilman shall be two (2) years: Provided, however, that in the 1978 election held under this charter there shall be elected three (3) councilmen to succeed the councilmen whose terms expire December 31, 1978, and in the 1979 election held under this charter there shall be elected three (3) councilmen to succeed the three (3) councilmen whose terms expire December 31, 1979, in order that the terms will be staggered. 
(Acts 1976, p. 3623, § 1; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 1) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 93-02, resolved on March 1, 1993, stated that the provisions of § 6.1, relating to councilmen qualifications and terms of office, have been modified and are now controlled by the State of Georgia's uniform municipal election laws. 
State Law reference— Additional disqualifying factors, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-3-4, 21-3-5; controlling and contrary state law provisions, §§ 21-3-51, 21-3-63. 
Sec. 6.2. - Mayor and councilmen. Special qualification. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter, no person who holds any office of the City of Palmetto may thereafter qualify for city office, except a new term for that office which he at that time is serving, without first submitting a resignation from the office which he is holding prior to the time of qualification. 
(Ord. No. 81-4, 7-6-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 81-4 can be found in Acts 1982, p. 5318. 
ARTICLE III. - [ELECTIONS, RECALL, REFERENDUM][2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 7.1. - Regular elections. Time for holding. 
The regular election for mayor and councilmen, or councilmen, shall be held on the first Saturday in December of each year. Officials elected at any regular election shall take office on the first of January next following such election. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 1; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 93-02, resolved on March 1, 1993, stated that the provisions of § 7.1, relating to time of regular elections, have been modified and are now controlled by the State of Georgia's uniform municipal election laws. 
State Law reference— Date of general municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-51; terms of office, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-60 et seq; controlling and contrary state law provisions, §§ 21-3-51, 21-3-63. 
Sec. 8.1. - Qualification of electors. 
Any person meeting the qualifications of an elector for members of the General Assembly under state law who has been a bona fide resident of Palmetto for three (3) months next preceding the election in which he desires to vote shall be qualified to register as an elector in any city election held under this charter. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of electors, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125. 
Sec. 9.1. - Election managers. 
The mayor and council shall elect, at least thirty (30) days prior to every election, three (3) qualified electors of the City of Palmetto who shall be election managers. The election managers shall be responsible for the proper conduct of the election, for preventing any fraud in connection therewith, for the proper counting of the ballots and for certifying the results as prescribed herein. 
Prior to the opening of the polls the election managers shall take the following oath in the presence of any judge, justice of the peace, or in the presence of each other: "I (name) do solemnly affirm that I will fulfill the responsibility placed upon me as an election manager to the best of my ability, that I will uphold the law in connection therewith, and faithfully certify the results as prescribed by law. So help me God." 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Municipal poll officers, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-30 et seq. 
Sec. 10.1. - Conduct of elections, notice. 
The mayor and council shall give notice of every regular or special city election at least thirty (30) days prior to said election by advertisement in the newspaper in which Fulton and Coweta counties sheriff's advertisements are made, and by posting said notice in at least three (3) conspicuous places within the city. The notice shall contain the time and place of holding the election, the offices to be filled and any other questions to be voted on. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Notice of municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-51 et seq. 
Sec. 10.2. - Time of elections, ballots. 
The polls shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. All voting shall be by ballot. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Time for opening and closing polls, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-313. 
Sec. 10.3. - Place of elections. 
The place for holding elections shall be prescribed by the mayor and council in the election notice. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Fixing of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163 et seq. 
Sec. 10.4. - Voter registration. 
In all elections held in the City of Palmetto, whether primary elections, special or general elections, the voters, in addition to the qualifications already prescribed, shall be registered as herein provided for. It shall be the duty of the clerk [administrator] of the City of Palmetto to open at his office in said city, within ten (10) days from the date of approval of this act [Acts 1978, p. 4142], a book for the registration of voters for said City of Palmetto, and keep the same open at his office at all times when his office is open for the payment of taxes or transaction of city business, except as hereinafter provided. Each person entitled to vote in said city shall subscribe in said book, which shall be arranged in alphabetical order, his or her name, age, place of residence, and occupation. Said clerk must not permit anyone to register who is not entitled to do so; and if he knowingly permits this to be done, he shall be discharged from office or otherwise punished as the mayor and council may decide. Such registration shall be permanent, and all names registered as herein prescribed shall remain upon said list and be qualified to vote in any election so long as said voters shall not become disqualified or his or her name be stricken from the registration list as hereinafter provided. The said registration book shall be closed ten (10) days, immediately preceding each election held in said city, whether the same be a primary election, special or general election, after which time no one shall be allowed or permitted to register for such election, and not until after such election, when said book shall be reopened for registration of voters. At all other times said book shall be kept open as herein provided. No person shall be allowed to vote at any election held in said city unless he or she has registered prior to the closing of said books and his or her name appears upon the registration list. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Registration of voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-120 et seq. 
Sec. 10.5. - Voter's lists. Purging. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk [administrator] of said city to check the registration list from time to time as may be required by the mayor and council of said City of Palmetto; and upon removal from the city, or other legal cause, he shall furnish the mayor and council of said city with a list of such names with the reasons for their disqualifications, and it shall be the duty of the said mayor and council to revise said registration lists and determine whether the name of such voter should be stricken from the list, after the clerk [administrator] has given five (5) days' written notice to said voter of the time and place when said matter will be acted upon by said mayor and council, said notice to be served either personally by any officer of said city authorized to serve city processes, or by mailing same to the last known address of the voter. At the time fixed in the notice the voter shall have the right to be heard by the said mayor and council before any final action is taken, if he or she so desires. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Purging of registration lists, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-3-126, 21-3-133. 
Sec. 10.6. - Voter's lists, board of registrars. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the mayor and council of the City of Palmetto may prescribe such further rules and regulations with reference to registering, or the revision of the registration lists, as they may see fit and proper, and may create a board of registrars if deemed best, and may delegate to, and place upon, said board of registrars any or all of the duties herein imposed upon the clerk [administrator] or the mayor and council, and they may place any or all of said duties upon any official or officials of said city they may designate, and provide additional compensation to be paid therefor if they see fit. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
Sec. 10.7. - Challenge. 
Any candidate, election manager, or qualified elector may challenge any voter and upon such challenge an election manager shall cause the challenged voter to take the following oath: "I (name) do for members of the General Assembly of Georgia, that I solemnly swear that I meet the requirements of an elector, have resided in Palmetto for at least thirty (30) days preceding this election and that I have not previously voted in this election. So help me God." This oath shall be subscribed on the voter's list opposite the name of the challenged elector. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Challenging voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-137 et seq. 
Sec. 10.8. - Supplies. 
The mayor and council shall direct that all necessary supplies including ballots needed for holding the election are placed in the hands of election managers. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
Sec. 10.9. - Counting the ballots, certifying results. 
The election managers shall proceed to count the ballots when the polls are closed. When all votes have been recorded, the ballots will be sealed in a container and delivered to the city clerk [administrator] who shall retain them, unopened, for sixty (60) days. In the event the election is contested or a recount demanded, the election managers in the presence of the council shall reopen the ballots and conduct such recount or take other action as deemed necessary to assure that no mistake or fraud has occurred. Cases of contested elections shall be heard and decided by the mayor and council. If there is no contest, at the end of sixty (60) days the ballots will be destroyed by the clerk [administrator]. 
The tally sheets containing the results of the election, along with the voter's list shall be certified by the managers and the results made public immediately. The election managers shall place their signatures over the seal. The mayor shall call a meeting of the council not later than seventy-two (72) hours after the polls have closed and certify the result of the election and declare the results of the election. Those receiving the highest number of votes for any office shall be declared elected. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
Sec. 11.1. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)	[ Reasons for vacancy; appointment of successor. ] 
(1)	The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)	Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	[ Special election. ] In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within two (2) years of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2; H.B. No. 1919, Act. No. 755, § 1) 
Sec. 12.1. - Recall, initiative and referendum. 
Any elective official of the city may be recalled by the electorate in the following manner: Those persons, qualified electors in the City of Palmetto, desiring to recall an elective official shall circulate a petition among the qualified voters of said city stating the name and office occupied by the person being recalled, and setting forth concisely the reasons for such action. When the petition contains the names of at least ten (10) percent of the qualified voters registered at the last regular election, said petition shall be presented to the clerk. The clerk shall then open a registration book for the purpose of registering those qualified voters who desire a referendum on the question. If within thirty (30) days, at least twenty-five (25) percent of the number of voters registered at the last regular election shall sign such book, then a referendum shall be called on the question not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty-five (45) days from such time as the necessary twenty-five (25) percent sign the book. Such referendum shall be governed by the procedure for regular elections and the ballot shall present the question: "For or against recall of ____________ from the office of ____________ ." Voters shall scratch one leaving their choice. If a majority vote for recall, the office shall be declared vacant and filled in the manner prescribed herein for filling vacancies. 
Any ordinance may be proposed by the electorate through the initiative as follows: Those qualified voters desiring to initiate an ordinance shall have the same printed on a petition which they shall circulate among the qualified voters of the city. When at least five (5) percent of the number of qualified voters registered at the last regular election shall have signed the petition, it shall be presented to the mayor and council at the next regular council meeting. The mayor and council shall consider the ordinance and, within thirty (30) days from date of receipt of the petition, shall either vote to take no action thereon or shall proceed to pass the proposal in the manner fixed for enacting ordinances. If the vote is to take no action, the clerk will notify the petitioners of such action and shall open a special registration book which shall remain open for thirty (30) days. Whenever twenty-five (25) percent of the number of qualified voters registered at the last regular election shall sign said registration book, the clerk [administrator] shall notify the mayor who shall call a special election in the manner prescribed, and the election notice shall contain the proposed ordinance. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in the special election vote for the proposal, it shall be declared in force. 
The electorate may call for a referendum on any ordinance enacted by the mayor and council, in the following manner: Those qualified voters desiring such referendum shall circulate among the qualified voters of the city a petition setting forth the ordinance on which a referendum is desired. When at least five (5) percent of the number of qualified voters registered at the last regular election shall have signed such petition, it shall be presented to the clerk [administrator] who shall open a special registration book. When twenty-five (25) percent of the number of qualified voters registered at the last regular election shall sign such book, the clerk [administrator] shall notify the mayor who shall suspend any action pursuant to the ordinance in question, and a special election shall be called on the question in the manner prescribed. The election notice shall set forth the ordinance on which the referendum is called. If a majority of the voters voting in the referendum vote for the ordinance, it shall be declared of full force and effect. If a majority of voters voting in the referendum vote against the ordinance, it shall be declared void. 
(Acts 1977, p. 3688, § 2; Acts 1978, p. 4142, § 2) 
State Law reference— Public Officers Recall Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-4-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE IV. - [ASSUMING OFFICE BY MAYOR AND COUNCILMEN, DUTIES, MEETINGS] 

Sec. 13.1. - Mayor and council, oath of office. 
Upon taking office the mayor shall take the following oath in the presence of the council and shall then administer the oath to the council members. Each oath shall be entered and subscribed on the minutes: "I ____________ (name) ____________ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and to the best of my ability perform the duties of Mayor (Councilman) of the City of Palmetto, that I will uphold the Constitution and Laws of the United States and the State of Georgia, and that I will enforce the provisions of the Charter and all duly enacted ordinances of the City of Palmetto, so help me God." 
Sec. 14.1. - Mayor, duties. 
The mayor is the chief executive officer of the city and chairman of the council. He shall preside at all official meetings of the city government. He is responsible to the people for seeing that the provisions of this charter and all duly enacted ordinances are carried out. He shall supervise the administration of the city government. He shall appoint a recorder to preside over the municipal court established by this charter. 
(Acts 1969, p. 2278, § 1) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ga. Const. art. VI, § X, par. I and O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 "recorder's court" has been changed to "municipal court" in the above section. 
State Law reference— Appointment of judges of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2. 
Sec. 15.1. - Councilmen, duties; [mayor pro tempore]. 
The council is the legislative body of the city government and is charged with the responsibility and authority for exercising the powers and duties conferred by this charter and by ordinances enacted hereunder. 
At the first council meeting after taking office the council shall elect a mayor pro tempore who shall exercise the authority and duties of the mayor in his absence, or in the event the office of mayor becomes vacant for any reason, he shall occupy such office until it shall be filled as provided herein. 
Sec. 16.1. - Exercising the vote, quorum, veto. 
The mayor and each councilman shall have one (1) vote on any measure, including ordinances, which is before the council. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. A majority vote rules; provided, however, that the mayor shall have the authority to veto any measure passed by the council. Such veto must be exercised prior to the next succeeding regular council meeting to the one at which the measure was approved. The council may overrule the veto by a two-thirds vote of the full council. 
Sec. 17.1. - Authority of mayor and council to maintain order. 
The mayor and each councilman is hereby granted the authority to call forth any and all male citizens of said city to aid in the arrest and apprehension of persons disturbing the peace or violating any laws of said city, and to assist in suppressing riots or other public disturbances. It shall be a misdemeanor for any such citizen to fail to respond when so called unless he shall make proper showing that he was physically incapacitated at the time. 
Sec. 18.1. - Council meetings, records. 
The council shall hold its regular meetings at such time as fixed by ordinance, but they shall be held at least monthly and shall be open to the public. Special meetings shall be called at the discretion of the mayor or may be called by any four (4) councilmen. The minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be accurately recorded in a minute book to be kept as a public record in the office of the clerk [administrator] and they shall be signed for each meeting by the mayor, or by the clerk [administrator] in the name of the mayor. 
Sec. 19.1. - Mayor and councilmen, salaries. 
The compensation of the mayor and councilmembers shall be as prescribed by ordinance. 
State Law reference— Compensation of members of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 20.1. - Mayor and councilmen excluded from other positions. 
Neither the mayor nor any councilmember may occupy any other elective position within the city government. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS, EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 21.1. - Departments; employees. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to establish by ordinance such departments within the city government as they shall deem necessary and expedient to accomplish any purpose consistent with this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. The officers, employees, and rules and regulations, including the fixing of compensation, duties and authority of personnel governing such departments shall be as established by ordinance. The appointment and discharge of all employees shall be within the exclusive authority of the council. In every case where an officer or employee of the city is discharged under circumstances which could be prejudicial he shall have the right to a public hearing before the council upon his written request. 
(Ord. No. 75-5, § 1, 10-6-75) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-5 can be found in Acts 1976, p. 4647. 
State Law reference— General authority relative to employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; authority to fix compensation and benefits for employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 22.1. - City clerk; [marshal]. 
The mayor and council at the first meeting each year shall elect a city clerk who shall act as clerk of council, keep the minutes, ordinances and resolutions, give notice of meetings and perform all other duties required by this charter or prescribed by the mayor and council. Either the chief of police or the clerk may act as marshal for the purposes of levying and collecting all fi. fa's. for taxes, assessments and fines due the city and both may levy and sell property in accordance with the laws in effect in this state governing sheriff's sales. 
ARTICLE VI. - [LEGISLATION] 

Sec. 23.1. - [Passage of] ordinances [and resolutions]. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to pass any resolution or ordinance consistent with this charter, the constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, morals, prosperity and well-being of the citizens of Palmetto. All resolutions and ordinances proposed shall be in writing and shall be read at an official meeting of the council. No resolution or ordinance shall be voted on at the meeting at which it is first read, but the vote thereon shall be called at a subsequent meeting on a separate day. The first reading, final passage and vote on every measure shall be recorded in the official minutes. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
Sec. 24.1. - Codification. 
The ordinances of the city, by-laws, and charter may at any time be codified into one (1) book to be known as the Code of the City of Palmetto and the same shall be adopted by the council. When said code is adopted it shall be admissible in evidence in any court of law upon the certificate of the clerk [administrator] in the name of the mayor stating that the same is the official code of the City of Palmetto. 
Sec. 25.1. - Personal interest. 
It shall be improper and illegal for the mayor or any councilmember to vote upon any question in which he has a personal interest. 
Sec. 26.1. - Ordinances continued in force. 
All duly enacted ordinances passed prior to the adoption of this charter shall continue in full force and effect, unless the same be in conflict herewith, until such time as they are amended or repealed in accordance with this charter. 
ARTICLE VII. - [BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS][3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 27.1. - Power to regulate and license. 
The power is hereby granted to the city to provide by ordinance for the registration and licensing of any trade, business, occupation, vocation, profession and any and every other undertaking pursued for the purpose of personal gain or profit of whatever nature, engaged in or carried on within the limits of the city, and regardless of whether or not the subject has an office or establishment within the city. 
The mayor and council are authorized to fix the amount, terms and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, provided that this authority is subject to the constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Georgia. 
This power is conferred for the purpose of regulation under the police power of the city and for the purpose of raising revenue for the operation of the city government through the imposition of a tax or fee for the privilege of operating within the city. This authority extends over individuals, partnerships, associations and corporations and their agents. 
Sec. 28.1. - Further power to regulate. 
In addition to, or cumulative of, any other power and authority granted herein, the City of Palmetto shall have full power and authority to license, regulate, control or prohibit theatrical exhibitions, merry-go-rounds, circuses, dance halls, skating rinks, shows and exhibitions of all kinds, drays, automobiles, jitneys, trucks, taxis, and public and private vehicles of all kinds; traveling vendors or patent medicines, soaps, notions, and all other articles; also hotels, boarding houses, restaurants, lunch stands, drinking stands, fish stands or markets, meat markets, mercantile establishments, chain stores, laundries, billiard, pool and other kinds of tables, tenpins, shooting galleries, and bowling alleys, slot machines or any games operated by "coin-in-slot" devices for carrying on games; also bakeries, dairies, barbershops, livery stables, sales stables, slaughter houses, tanyards, garage or motor vehicle repair shops, blacksmith shops, gins, sawmills, planing mills; also auctioneers, peddlers, and pawnbrokers; all agents of fire, health, accident, indemnity, casualty, and life insurance companies; the sale of all kinds of beverages, alcoholic and nonalcoholic, cigars, cigarettes, and tobacco products of all kinds; also dealers in and/or dispensers of gasoline, either at wholesale or retail, from tanks, or otherwise; and all businesses, occupations, professions, callings, trades and avocations, which under the laws of this state are subject to license; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to public utility corporations under the supervision of the Georgia Public Service Commission. And said city shall have the power to require registration of, and to assess and collect a license tax on all such businesses, etc., and all other businesses, trades, professions, occupations, or callings conducted or engaged in within the corporate limits of said city, and such occupation tax or license tax shall constitute a lien upon all the property of the taxpayer or person liable, and shall take rank and be enforceable by execution in the same manner as ad valorem taxes due said city; and said city may require the registration of, and payment of license tax on, all such businesses, etc., as a prerequisite to the right to operate or engage in said business in said city, and shall have power to punish anyone conducting or engaging in any such business, etc., without first registering and paying said license taxes. Said city shall have full and complete power to provide by ordinance for classification of all classes and businesses, and all other rules and regulations necessary and proper in the premises. 
Sec. 29.1. - Franchises. 
The authority is hereby vested in the city to exercise control over the use of its streets. The power is hereby conferred on the city to grant franchises for the use of its streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone and electric companies and transportation companies. This franchise right extends to, but is not limited to, the erection of poles and stringing of wires, laying of pipes, lines or conduits, both above and below the surface. The mayor and council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of fifty (50) years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receive just and adequate compensation therefor. 
The mayor and council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk [administrator] in a registration book to be kept by him. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for the registration, within a reasonable time, of all franchises previously granted. 
State Law reference— Authority to grant franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAXATION AND FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation power, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, par. I. 

Sec. 30.1. - Ad valorem tax. 
For the purpose of defraying the cost of government, the mayor and council are hereby authorized to levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all property subject to taxation, both real and personal, within the city limits. The rate of taxation shall be as prescribed by ordinance within the maximum limits established by the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. If additional funds over and above the amount realized from the maximum allowable rate are necessary to defray the cost of government, such additional amounts shall be raised in accordance with Georgia Code Annotated, Section 92-4104 [now ;hk; O.C.G.A. § 48-5-353], as it now exists or as it shall be amended or superseded. 
Sec. 30.2. - Collections, returns, payment. 
The city clerk [administrator], or other officer designated by the mayor and council, shall be the city tax collector. The manner and time of making returns and payments shall be as prescribed by ordinance. The mayor and council is empowered to provide for penalties and interest on delinquent taxes; provided, that any penalty shall not exceed an amount equal to the amount of the tax due plus interest at seven (7) percent from the date due. 
The clerk shall enforce all taxes duly assessed under this charter by issuing execution against the delinquent party or his property. Such execution shall be directed to an officer authorized to execute same who shall levy on the property and conduct a sale in the manner prescribed for sheriff's sales in this state. 
Sec. 30.3. - Payment by installment. 
The mayor and council may provide for payment of taxes by installment; provided, however, that all installments shall become due within one (1) year from the date said taxes were due. 
Sec. 30.4. - Assessors. 
The mayor and council shall elect three (3) qualified voters of the city who shall constitute the board of tax assessors. Said tax assessors may be removed and replaced at the discretion of the mayor and council. Upon being appointed each tax assessor shall take the following oath: "I do solemnly swear to faithfully execute the duties of tax assessor to the best of my ability and to uphold the charter and ordinances of the City of Palmetto and the Constitution and Laws of the State of Georgia as they relate to my office. So help me God." 
It shall be the duty of the board of tax assessors to assess the taxable property within the city and to cause the same to be placed on the digest, to equalize assessments, to discover and return for taxation any taxable property which has not been placed on the digest or returned by the owner as required by ordinance, and to review their assessments from time to time as necessary. 
Appeals shall be made to the full board of tax assessors in a manner prescribed by ordinance and the decisions of the board shall be binding on the taxpayer. 
Affidavits of illegality may be filed in the manner prescribed by state law for county taxes and directed to the superior court of Fulton County or Coweta County depending on which county the property is located in. 
Sec. 30.5. - Professional assistance. 
The mayor and council are authorized to hire and contract with professional corporations, firms and individuals for the purpose of securing advice and assistance for any matter pertaining to the proper administration of application of laws and ordinances of said city. 
Sec. 31.1. - Further power to tax. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to levy such other taxes, in addition to those enumerated herein, as shall be authorized by the General Assembly. 
Sec. 32.1. - Bond issues. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issues by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 33.1. - Annual budget and audit. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to adopt an annual budget and to provide for an audit of the city's finances. The governing authority may hire and contract with professional auditors for their services. 
State Law reference— Bonds generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq. 
Sec. 34.1. - Power to borrow. 
The mayor and council is hereby vested with the power to borrow money in the name of the city for the purpose of making up temporary deficits in the city treasury. Such loans shall not exceed one (1) mil, and shall be repaid within the fiscal year in which such loan is made. 
ARTICLE IX. - [PUBLIC WAYS, SEWERS, DRAINS][5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; sewers generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

Sec. 35.1. - Streets [powers generally]. 
The mayor and council is hereby vested with the power to lay out, open, widen, change, straighten, alter, improve, vacate, abandon and otherwise exercise complete control over its streets, alleys, squares and sidewalks. 
Sec. 35.2. - Streets; eminent domain. 
In order to carry out the powers granted, the power of eminent domain is conferred upon the mayor and council within or without the corporate limits of said city. The power of eminent domain shall be exercised in accordance with Georgia Code Annotated, Chapters 36-2 through 36-6 [now O.C.G.A. tit. 22 [22-1-1 et seq.]] and all laws amendatory or supplemental thereto. 
State Law reference— Municipalities granted power of eminent domain, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, para. V. 
Sec. 35.3. - Nuisances. 
The mayor and council shall provide for the removal of any and all obstacles and nuisances in regard to the streets, alleys or sidewalks, or other public places within the city and shall adopt appropriate ordinances to accomplish this purpose. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 35.4. - Street improvements. 
At such time as Chapter 69-4, Georgia Code Annotated [now O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 39 [§ 36-39-1 et seq.]] is adopted by referendum as provided by Code Section 69-402 [now O.C.G.A. § 36-39-2], the same shall become a part of this charter, subject to all future amendments and supplements to said Chapter 69-4, and said Chapter 69-4 shall govern street improvements within the city. 
Sec. 36.1. - Sewers and drains [eminent domain; tapping on]. 
The power is hereby granted to the mayor and council to provide for the establishment, extension and maintenance of a system of sewers and drains, together with a sewerage disposal system. This power includes the authority to extend said system beyond the corporate limits. For these purposes the city is granted the power of eminent domain both within and without the corporate limits. Power of eminent domain shall be exercised in accordance with Chapters 36-2 through 36-6, Georgia Code Annotated [now O.C.G.A. tit. 22 [§ 22-1-1 et seq.]], subject to such amendments and supplements as shall be enacted thereto. 
The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for reasonable connection fees for tapping into the water and sewer lines of said city, and may compel citizens to tap into same when such service is made available. 
ARTICLE X. - [ZONING AND PLANNING, CONSTRUCTION, UTILITIES, CEMETERIES] 

Sec. 37.1. - Zoning and planning. 
The mayor and council is hereby vested with such powers relative to zoning and planning within the corporate limits as are granted to municipalities under Chapter 69-8, Georgia Code Annotated [now repealed], and any amendments or supplements which may be enacted thereto. 
State Law reference— Power to plan and zone, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. IV. 
Sec. 38.1. - Building, electrical and plumbing regulations. 
The mayor and council is hereby vested with the power to enact such reasonable rules and regulations as it may seem necessary or expedient regarding the construction of buildings, remodeling of buildings, plumbing and electrical wiring and equipping of buildings, in order to promote the safety and welfare of its citizens and to guard against fire or other property damage. This power may, in the discretion of the governing body, be exercised by adoption of such standard building, electrical and plumbing codes as may seem appropriate; provided, however, that no code so adopted, nor regulations promulgated in connection therewith, shall apply to communication equipment installations made by or for a utility rendering common carrier communication services and required by it to be utilized as a part of its plant in the rendition of its duly authorized services to the public. The mayor and council is empowered to engage the necessary personnel to enforce such rules and regulations as adopted, and to charge reasonable fees for inspection and permits; and may require the obtaining of a permit as a condition precedent to any construction, building, or electrical or plumbing work. 
The mayor and council may enact all ordinances necessary to enforce said rules and regulations. 
Sec. 39.1. - Municipal utilities. 
The mayor and council is hereby granted the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, maintain and operate a waterworks system, electrical power system and gas systems; to establish rates and charge fees for services rendered by any of said systems; to finance any of said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with law; to exercise the power of eminent domain in regard to any of said systems, both within and without the corporate limits; to contract to furnish service through any of said systems to consumers outside the corporate limits. 
State Law reference— Municipal water systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 
Sec. 39.2. - Telecommunications. 
The City shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, including cable television services (CATV), to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services, or both, with the systems or services of consumers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the City of Palmetto, Georgia, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 4-1-02) 
Sec. 40.1. - Cemeteries. 
The mayor and council is hereby granted the authority to purchase, acquire, lease, accept and hold property, or any legal interest therein, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining public cemeteries whenever the same shall be deemed in the best interest of the citizens of said city. The governing body may establish rules and regulations governing cemeteries, and may establish a schedule of fees and charges in connection therewith. 
The power of eminent domain is granted, both within and without the city limits for the purpose of acquiring property for public cemeteries. 
State Law reference— Eminent domain, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, par. V; O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE XI. - MUNICIPAL COURT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ga. Const. art. VI, § X, par. I and O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 all references in this article to "recorder's court" are changed to "municipal court." 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 41.1. - Established. 
There is hereby established a court to be known as the "Municipal Court of the City of Palmetto." Said court shall be presided over by a recorder appointed by the mayor in conformity with the provisions of this charter. Such recorder shall preside at the municipal court established by this charter and for all intents and purposes he is constituted an ex officio justice of the peace in the manner of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatsoever nature in the several courts of this state. 
(Acts 1969, p. 2278, § 2) 
State Law reference— Powers of judges of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3. 
Sec. 41.2. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or such times as deemed necessary by the recorder to dispose of the business of the court or both. The court shall sit at a place designated by ordinance. 
(Acts 1969, p. 2278, § 3) 
Sec. 41.3. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Palmetto and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence, or so near thereto as to affect its operation, for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or twenty (20) days in jail or both. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for one hundred eighty (180) days or both. 
The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations and may prescribe the conditions for forfeiture of the same. 
The municipal court shall have authority to administer oaths and perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears that a state law has been violated. 
The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served as executed by an officer so authorized by this charter or by state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-02, § 1, 8-7-95) 
Sec. 41.4. - Records. 
The recorder shall cause the city clerk [administrator] to keep such records of proceedings as shall be necessary to a full understanding of the charge, evidence and disposition of each case tried before the municipal court. 
(Acts 1969, p. 2278, § 4) 
State Law reference— Powers and jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-3, 36-32-5 et seq. 
Sec. 41.5. - Certiorari. 
Certiorari from the municipal court to the superior court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as prescribed for certiorari from the various justice courts of the state. 
Sec. 41.6. - Procedure. 
All reasonable rules and regulations relative to procedure and to the operation of said municipal court may be enacted by the mayor and council, provided that such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions set forth in this charter and in conformance with the constitutions of the United States and Georgia and all laws of general application thereunder. 
Sec. 41.7. - Recorders' compensation. 
The compensation of the recorder appointed hereunder shall be as prescribed by ordinance. 
(Acts 1969, p. 2278, § 5) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish salaries, ;hk; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 41.8. - Prosecution of nontraffic ordinances by summons. 
Prosecution of nontraffic ordinance violations in the municipal court may be commenced and carried on by the issuance of a summons, without the necessity of a warrant where the violation occurs in the presence of a police officer of the city or other official otherwise authorized by ordinance to issue summons. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, 5-14-85) 
Sec. 41.9. - Penalty for failing to appear in court. 
The failure of a defendant to appear in court as directed by summons or warrant issued under the provisions of this article may be treated by the judge of the municipal court as contempt and punishable as provided by the charter. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, 5-14-85) 
Sec. 41.10. - Cumulative procedure. 
This article shall in no way be interpreted as prohibiting the application for or the issuance of a city warrant in any instance where the officer or other official deems such course to be appropriate, or where the ordinance violation is not committed in the presence of the arresting officer, or other official, and should be interpreted as constituting cumulative procedure insofar as the prosecution and disposition of nontraffic violations are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, 5-14-85) 
ARTICLE XII. - [LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS] 

Sec. 42.1. - [Severability]. 
The provisions of this charter are severable, and should any part or parts thereof be held unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction the same shall not affect those portions remaining, but they shall remain of full force and effect. 
Sec. 43.1. - Repeal [specifically]. 
An act entitled "An Act to create a new charter for the Town of Palmetto, in Campbell County (Fulton County), Georgia, and to repeal all acts theretofore passed creating a charter for said town or amending same, and for other purposes," (Ga. Laws 1920, pgs. 1380—1398) approved August 7, 1920, as amended by an act as approved July 29, 1926 (Ga. Laws 1926, pg. 675), as amended by an act approved August 15, 1927 (Ga. Laws 1927, pgs. 1462—1465), as amended by an act approved August 26, 1931 (Ga. Laws 1931, pgs. 915—916), as amended by an act approved March 15, 1943 (Ga. Laws 1943, pgs. 1501—1502), as amended by an act approved March 15, 1943 (Ga. Laws 1943, pgs. 1503—1504), as amended by an act approved February 25, 1949 (Ga. Laws 1949, pgs. 1535—1536), as amended by an act approved March 4, 1953 (Ga. Laws 1953, pgs. 2980—2985), as amended by an act approved March 3, 1962 (Ga. Laws 1962, pgs. 2851—2853), is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 44.1. - [Repeal generally]. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ACTS 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
 This table shows the location within this Charter of those ordinances included herein. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Part II of Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated, the "Code of the City of Palmetto," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 24.1. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Palmetto" followed it. 
City council, council, governing body. These terms are used interchangeably, and refer to the duly and lawfully constituted governing body of the city. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Fulton and/or the County of Coweta, whichever is applicable. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include the persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer or employee is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Palmetto" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property shall include every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public. 
Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
Written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes, etc.; references to Code. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the governing body without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the Code of the City of Palmetto, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Palmetto is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1977, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the governing body, which will cause the law of the City of Palmetto, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1977, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	In this section "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by any combination thereof. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)	The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(e)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1977, § 1-8) 
Charter reference— Limitation upon penalties imposed by municipal court, § 41.3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or allowing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money. 
(2)	Authorizing the issuance of bonds or any evidence of indebtedness. 
(3)	Authorizing or approving a contract. 
(4)	Granting a franchise. 
(5)	Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving or widening any street or public way. 
(6)	Establishing or altering the grades of any street. 
(7)	Approving a budget. 
(8)	Levying or imposing any tax that is not codified in this Code. 
(9)	Establishing salaries or other benefits for officers or employees of the city. 
(10)	Dealing with special assessments. 
(11)	Annexing property into the city. 
(12)	Dealing with subdivisions, zoning and/or development. 
(13)	Whose purpose has been accomplished. 
(14)	Which is special although permanent in effect. 
(15)	Which is temporary although general in effect. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal court, ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and council, § 5.1 et seq.; departments and employees generally, § 21.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 8. 
State Law reference— General authority relative to officers and employees, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2, 36-35-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26—2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-41. - Appointment. 
The city administrator shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council, and shall serve at their pleasure. 
(Ord. No. 88-02, § 2-3(a), 6-6-88) 
Sec. 2-42. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city administrator shall give a good and sufficient bond payable to the governing body; such bond to be fixed and approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 88-02, § 2-3(b), 6-6-88) 
Sec. 2-43. - Duties of office. 
The city administrator shall have the following duties: 
(1)	To maintain a uniform system of accounts and keep such other records and accounts as may be required by this Code, statute or ordinance; and 
(2)	To furnish the council with monthly statements detailing all receipts and payments of funds for the month; and 
(3)	To prepare and submit to the city council prior to the beginning of each fiscal year a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; and 
(4)	To keep a current inventory showing all city property, real and personal, and its location; and 
(5)	To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Code, or required by ordinance, regulation or direction of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 88-02, § 2-3(c), 6-6-88) 
Sec. 2-44. - Salary. 
The salary for the position of city administrator shall be set from time to time by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 88-02, § 2-3(d), 6-6-88) 
Secs. 2-45—2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLAN 

Sec. 2-51. - Generally. 
An Ordinance approved July 8, 1977, as amended, establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the city and setting forth the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of said plan by the city and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System as provided by O.C.G.A. Section 47-5-1 et seq. is hereby amended by: 
(1)	Striking in their entirety articles I through VI of the plan and articles I through XI of the joint trust agreement and substituting in lieu thereof the following new articles I through XVI of the plan and articles I through XIII of the joint trust agreement; 
(2)	Striking subparagraph (3) from article V, section 1a., and by substituting in lieu thereof a new subparagraph (3) to read as follows: 
(3) As an elected or appointed member of the governing authority, shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per month for each year of service or major fraction thereof, subject to the limitations of section 7 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § 1, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, 9-3-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-09, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1990, amended § 2-71 of the Code, which provisions have been codified herein by the editor as Div. 3, § 2-51. The articles cited in this section are not included herein but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city administrator. 
Sec. 2-52. - Retirement benefits for elected officials. 
An ordinance to amend an Ordinance approved July 5, 1977, as amended, establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the city and setting forth the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of said plan by the city and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit system as provided by O.C.G.A. Section 47-5-1 et seq., so as to provide retirement benefits for elected officials; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 95-05, 1-2-96) 
Note— Please refer to § 2-51 for other amendments to the employee retirement plan ordinance approved July 5, 1977. 
DIVISION 4. - COMPENSATION FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS 

Sec. 2-53. - Generally. 
The compensation for the mayor and councilmembers of the City of Palmetto shall be as follows: 
(1)	Mayor. The mayor of the City of Palmetto shall be compensated for services rendered to the city. The amount of said compensation shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year. 
(2)	Mayor pro-tem. The mayor pro-tem of the City of Palmetto shall be compensated for services rendered to the City. The amount of said compensation shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per year. 
(3)	Councilmembers. The councilmembers of the City of Palmetto shall be compensated for services rendered to the city. The amount of said compensation shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, 7-9-07) 
Secs. 2-54—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Taxation and finance, § 30.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12; utilities, ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-61. - Bank accounts. 
The city administrator, with the approval of the governing body shall maintain such bank accounts as, from time to time, are necessary or convenient for the transaction of city business. Each such account shall have as signatories thereon the mayor, mayor pro tem, city administrator, and a member of the finance committee as designated by resolution of the governing body. Any transaction upon such account shall require the signatures of at least two (2) of the above signatories. 
(Code 1977, § 9-5; Ord. No. 87-1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 2-62. - Budgetary controls. 
(a)	Adoption of budget. All budgets adopted by the city shall be adopted in accordance with and pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-81-1 et seq. 
(b)	Expenditures. No expenditures shall exceed the line item budget amount without an amendment to the budget. Department heads shall have the authority to transfer budget line items within their department, limited to five hundred dollars ($500.00) by submitting a budget amendment sheet to the city administrator. The city administrator shall have the authority for all budget transfers over five hundred dollars ($500.00) but less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). These transfers can be between funds which are from the contingency fund. Any budget transfer over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) requires the approval of the mayor and council. All budget amendments shall be recorded on the budget amendment forms for the permanent record that contains the appropriate authorizing signatures. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, 2-5-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-02, adopted Feb. 2, 1990, added § 2-3, which section has been redesignated by the editor as § 2-62 for purposes of classification. 
Chapter 3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Business license taxes and fees, § 12-26 et seq.; false alarms, § 14-112. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; false alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1—3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BURGLAR OR SECURITY ALARMS 

Sec. 3-26. - Permit required. 
(a)	Prior to the activation of an electronic burglar or security system connected directly to the police department, application shall be made to the city police department on a form designated by them. The chief of police, or designee, shall have the right to inspect the design and installation of any proposed system and reject those which appear to be poorly conceived or constructed. Such inspection shall not be construed to be approval in lieu of inspection by the city for compliance with construction standards nor will such inspection give rise to future liability in the event of malfunction. 
(b)	The application shall contain the names of not less than two (2) persons who have knowledge of the security system and the ability to reset the system and secure the building in the event of alarm. The person in possession of the building in or on which the security system is installed shall be responsible for notifying the police department of any changes in the identity of any person who may be contacted in the event of false or actual alarm. 
Sec. 3-27. - Activation of alarm. 
No burglar or security alarm system connected directly to the police department shall be activated except in response to criminal activity unless authorized previously by the police department. Malfunctions in the system, error or mistake in the system, or intentional misuse shall subject the operator, tenant or owner in possession, or others responsible, to a fine in the municipal court as follows: 
(1)	A twenty-five-dollar fine shall be levied on any person responsible for two (2) alarm errors, malfunctions, or intentional misuses or other false alarms within the previous twelve (12) months. After the second false alarm, the city shall notify those responsible for the premises, as listed in the permit application, that a third false alarm will result in a fine. 
(2)	After the third false alarm, any subsequent false alarms may result in the revocation of the premises burglar and security alarm permit resulting in an order to remove the system. 
(3)	Notwithstanding the above, the final determination regarding the issuance of a fine under this article shall be made by the mayor who may take into consideration such mitigating factors as acts of God, city-wide power failure or fluctuations, and other such factors. 
Sec. 3-28. - Refusal of key holder to respond. 
When a false alarm has resulted in a response by units of the police department, the owner or tenant in possession shall be summoned to respond to the premises to reset the system and/or secure the building. Failure of such person to respond will result in the police units leaving the premises until the system is repaired, reset or the building secured, as appropriate. No liability will attach to the city due to such action arising as a result of the owner, or tenant in possession to respond when summoned to a false alarm. Neither shall the city be liable if the owner, or tenant in possession fail to notify the police department of any change in the identity of the responsible person who shall be contacted in the event of false or actual alarm. Applicants of a permit for the installation and operation of a burglar or security alarm system shall furnish, at the time the application is submitted, a hold harmless agreement agreeing that no such liability will attach, provided that the conditions of all ordinances are met by the police department. 
Sec. 3-29. - Automatic dialers. 
It shall be unlawful to key automatic dialer burglar alarm systems to the police department. These type of alarms shall be keyed to a private service that will then notify the police department. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power to regulate and license businesses, § 27.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Business license taxes and fees, § 12-26 et seq.; public drunkenness, § 14-49. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter definitions shall be the same as those utilized and contained within O.C.G.A. tit. 3 [§ 3-1-1 et seq.], except as may be contained and defined elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1) 
State Law reference— Definitions generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the city, to establish reasonable controls and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages, to protect schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve and protect existing residential areas, with reasonable considerations among others, to the character of the areas, and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion of the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining neighborhood and property values, and protect against the concentration of the retail outlets for spirituous liquors in one (1) family or to prevent undesirable persons from controlling the retail liquor industry. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2) 
Sec. 4-3. - Compliance with chapter required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverage without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 3-3) 
Sec. 4-4. - Employees; eligibility, fingerprinting, etc. 
(a)	No person shall be employed by any establishment holding any license under this chapter until such person has been fingerprinted by the police department and has been issued a certificate of eligibility for employment by the police department. 
(b)	All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall, within seventy-two (72) hours after the date of their first work in an establishment licensed under this chapter, report to the police department for purposes of fingerprinting. 
(c)	All persons reporting to the police department may be required to fill out a personal history statement for the purpose of an investigation into their eligibility for employment. 
(d)	The police department shall make a search relative to the police record of the person fingerprinted. The commission of a felony, and the conviction thereof, shall act as a complete bar to employment in an establishment licensed under this chapter. The conviction of misdemeanors, of any type, shall likewise act as a bar if the same shall occur within a five (5) year period next preceding the date of employment and are of either such numbers or types as to indicate that the individual has a bad reputation. Minor traffic violations are excepted and the conviction of one (1) single misdemeanor during a five-year period shall not act as a bar to employment. 
(e)	The police department shall either issue the certificate or shall issue a letter both to the licensee and to the individual stating the reasons such certificate cannot be issued. 
(f)	The licensee may appeal an adverse finding of the police department to the municipal court. 
(g)	The police department may, from time to time, and as additional information becomes available, review any certificates issued under this section and may as circumstances dictate, withdraw and/or suspend certificates for cause. Adverse findings may be appealed to the recorder's court in accordance with subsection (f) above. 
(h)	Owners of five (5) percent or more of any business licensed under this chapter are not required to have a certificate provided they are listed on the application for such license. 
(i)	The licensee shall pay an investigation fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each investigation. 
(Code 1977, § 3-50) 
Sec. 4-5. - List of owners and employees. 
It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license under this chapter to keep a current list of all persons having a five (5) percent or more beneficial interest in any business so licensed, and of all employees, on file at the police station. Such list shall show the full name, home address, telephone number, age, and place of employment. Such list shall be checked and updated as necessary, but at least annually. 
(Code 1977, § 3-51) 
Sec. 4-6. - Offenses concerning minors. 
(a)	Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)	No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(2)	No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)	No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
(4)	No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(5)	No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)	The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)	For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)	At a religious ceremony. 
(c)	The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under twenty-one (21) years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)	The prohibition contained in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(e)	If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under twenty-one (21) years of age from: 
(1)	Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2)	Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; 
(3)	Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(f)	Testimony by any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding against another person for violation of any provision of this section, shall not be used in any administrative or judicial proceedings brought against such testifying person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(g)	In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually twenty-one (21) years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection (d) of this section in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than twenty-one (21) years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3-52—3-54; Ord. No. 88-11, § 144, 12-5-88) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Secs. 4-7—4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURERS, WHOLESALERS AND OFF-PREMISES CONSUMPTION DEALERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of package sales, manufacture, etc., of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-31. - Scope. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article applies to the following: 
(1)	The sale of alcoholic beverages at retail for off-premises consumption; 
(2)	The sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale. 
Sec. 4-32. - Excise tax—Distilled spirits, wine. 
(a)	There is levied an excise tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter on the retail sale of distilled spirits. There is levied an excise tax of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter on the retail sale of wine. 
(b)	The taxes levied by this section shall be paid to the city administrator on the second Monday of each month for the preceding month. 
(Code 1977, § 3-5; Ord. No. 86-7, 12-30-86) 
State Law reference— Local tax on distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; local tax on sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-33. - Same—Malt beverages. 
All persons doing business of selling malt beverages within the city shall be subject to taxes at a rate of: 
(1)	0.4167 of a cent per ounce. Fractional parts of cases shall be computed proportionately. 
(2)	All malt beverages which are sold in or from a barrel, keg, drum or other bulk container the excise tax shall be based, computed and collected at the rate of 0.3024 of a cent per ounce. 
(Code 1977, § 3-6) 
State Law reference— Local tax on sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 4-34. - Delivery of beverage beyond premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to deliver any alcoholic beverages beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by his license. This section does not apply to a manufacturer or a wholesaler. 
(Code 1977, § 3-55) 
Sec. 4-35. - Package store building and grounds. 
(a)	New construction shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the existing ordinances of the city governing new construction. 
(b)	Old construction shall be brought up to standards of new construction as nearly as practical. 
(c)	The building for a package store for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the container shall have a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space and, in addition, those stores licensed for the sale of spirituous liquor shall have a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of paved parking areas which shall be within the limits described within section 4-65(3). 
(d)	The building shall be equipped with a burglar alarm system. 
(e)	The building shall be primarily of brick, masonry and steel construction. 
(f)	The building and grounds shall be regularly cleaned and no deposit of litter and/or trash shall be allowed to accumulate. 
(Code 1977, § 3-62; Ord. No. 80-3, 4-7-80) 
Sec. 4-36. - View of entrance and interior of package store. 
(a)	The front entrance of any retail package store shall be clearly visible from the public street. 
(b)	No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be installed so as to prevent a clear view into the interior of any retail package store. 
(c)	Each store shall be so lighted so that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Code 1977, § 3-56) 
Sec. 4-37. - Advertising—Lighted electric signs. 
No lighted electric advertising signs shall be placed external to the building in which the licensee under this article has his place of business. All advertising signs shall be turned off during the hours that the place of business is not open for retail sale. 
(Code 1977, § 3-57) 
Sec. 4-38. - Same—Exterior signs. 
No sign of any kind, painted or electrical, shall be permitted on the exterior of any licensed premises. No placard of any kind which is visible from the street shall make reference to the price of any alcoholic beverage sold therein. However, nothing in this section shall prevent any retailer from erecting one (1) external sign, no larger than four (4) by eight (8) feet, for the identification of his business under this article and the product sold therein. Such single sign may be of either the painted or electric type, of sound construction, and mounted no more than twelve (12) feet above the ground. Such single sign is to be extinguished whenever the retail store is not in operation. 
(Code 1977, § 3-58) 
Sec. 4-39. - Same—Publicizing. 
No licensee under this article shall advertise, or in any manner publicize, either alcoholic beverages or the presence or location of a place of business within which such beverages are sold. 
Nothing herein, however, shall preclude such licensee from identifying his place of business as provided in section 4-38. 
(Code 1977, § 3-59) 
Sec. 4-40. - Prices to be displayed. 
Each licensee under this article shall either mark each container of alcoholic beverages with the price thereof or shall have the price placed on the bottom of the shelf where the containers are exhibited for sale or shall otherwise clearly post the retail price of each container offered for sale. 
(Code 1977, § 3-60) 
State Law reference— Displaying of prices outside licensed premises prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-26. 
Sec. 4-41. - Sanitation regulations; immoral conduct, etc. 
(a)	All premises licensed under this article shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to permit and/or encourage any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or lewd, immoral conduct or practices on the premises. 
(Code 1977, § 3-61) 
Sec. 4-42. - Pinball and similar machines. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person which has been issued and maintains a valid license under this article to own, maintain or operate on the premises for which the license is issued any machine having a slot for the insertion of a coin so as to operate the same for chance, skill or for entertainment and/or amusement purposes. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit mechanical music machines or like machines, nor machines owned and operated exclusively for the sale of merchandise where neither the element of chance or skill is involved, nor machines owned by an individual and maintained in his private residence for private use. 
(Ord. No. 80-7, § 3-62, 9-8-80) 
Sec. 4-43. - Sale on election days. 
Any licensee under this article shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages on any election days as permitted on any other day. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, § 3-8, 11-3-86) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-44. - Sunday sales. 
Package sales of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine shall be permitted on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 12-2-2013) 
Secs. 4-45—4-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local licenses, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-2, 3-5-42, 3-6-40. 

Sec. 4-61. - Required for manufacture or sale. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured for sale, sold at wholesale or retail for off-premises consumption, in the original package or otherwise, except under a license granted by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3-20) 
Sec. 4-62. - Application form, content. 
(a)	All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this division shall make written application to the city for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the governing body. Such application shall state: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)	The place where the proposed business is to be located; 
(3)	The nature and character of the business to be carried on; 
(4)	If a partnership the names of the partners; 
(5)	If a corporation the names of the officers and of all persons holding more than a five (5) percent interest therein; 
(6)	A certificate from the applicant that the information contained therein is true and correct; and 
(7)	Such other information as may be required by the governing body. 
(b)	All applications shall have attached thereto a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the straight line distance from the proposed premises to the building and to the property line of the nearest church, school, residence, and commercial establishment. 
(c)	Applicants agree, by filing an application, to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the governing body or chief of police and being considered important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the issuance of such license. 
(d)	The failure to produce, attach or provide any required information, or data to any person, within thirty (30) days after request shall result in the automatic dismissal of the application. 
(Code 1977, § 3-22) 
State Law reference— Additional requirements for applicants, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 4-63. - Advertisement of intent to engage in business. 
(a)	All applicants for a license under this division shall give notice of their intent to make such application by advertisement once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the newspaper of general circulation in which legal advertisements of the city are carried. Such notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, the name of any person having a five (5) percent or greater interest in the proposed business and shall be captioned "Application for City of Palmetto Spirituous Liquor License" or a similar caption for a different license. 
(b)	The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten (10) point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch, two-column advertisement. 
(c)	The second running of the advertisement shall be completed, and the advertisements in circulation, before application shall be made to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3-23) 
Sec. 4-64. - Investigation of application report. 
All applications required under this division shall be investigated by the police department. The police department shall have a minimum of ten (10) days, or until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, whichever is longer, to complete their investigation. The police department will report its findings to the governing body, either in writing or orally at the meeting of the governing body. If the report is in writing it shall be filed with the police committee prior to the meeting of the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 3-24) 
Sec. 4-65. - Qualifications—General. 
No license required under this division shall be granted where the application, investigation by the police department, or the evidence on a hearing shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)	That the applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)	That the applicant has had a license issued under the police powers of a city in this state previously suspended or revoked within the ten-year period next preceding the date of application unless the applicant can show that the suspension or revocation was later lifted and the license restored by the city. 
(3)	That the application for any license hereunder does not furnish evidence of adequate parking facilities available to the applicant's patrons and within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed location. 
(4)	That the applicant has other interest in any business holding the same license under this division or that a member of the family of the applicant is a distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3-25) 
Sec. 4-66. - Same—Citizenship, residence. 
(a)	No license shall be granted under this division to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien, and who has not resided continuously within the state for twelve (12) months prior to the date on which the application is made. 
(b)	Where the applicant is a corporation, it must be incorporated under the laws of the state, and all persons having a five (5) percent or greater interest must meet the above stated citizenship and residence requirements. 
(c)	If the applicant is a partnership all partners having a five (5) percent or greater interest therein must meet the above stated citizenship and residence requirements. 
(d)	Hotels, motels, motor inns and other businesses who are corporations and whose primary business is something other than the operation of a business for the sale of alcoholic beverages are exempt from the above citizenship and residence requirements. 
(Code 1977, § 3-26; Ord. No. 89-02, 2-6-89) 
Sec. 4-67. - Same—Prior convictions prohibited. 
(a)	No original license under this division shall be issued to any person who shall have been convicted within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of application of any felony of any state or of the United States. 
(b)	The word "person" as used above includes any individual having any beneficial interest five (5) percent or greater, either as owner, partner or stockholder, or in any beneficial manner whatever. 
(c)	The term "convicted" shall include the adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, or the forfeiture of a bond. 
(Code 1977, § 3-27) 
Sec. 4-68. - Limitation on other interest and number of licenses within a family. 
All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement, under oath, that no person, having a five (5) percent or greater interest in the business for which the application is made, has any other interest, greater than five (5) percent, in any other business granted the same license under this division and that no member of his family has any interest, greater than five (5) percent, in any business granted the same type license under this division and that no person, or member of his family, having a five (5) percent or greater interest in the business for which this application is made has any interest in any distributorship of alcoholic beverages doing business within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3-28) 
Sec. 4-69. - Location of premises limited to designated areas. 
(a)	No license shall be issued for that part of the city which shall lie in any county which shall not have legalized the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to law. 
(b)	No license shall be issued to any person for the operation of a business except in properly zoned areas. 
(c)	Existing licensed businesses, upon annexation into the city, shall be permitted to continue operation, irrespective of zoning or other location considerations. 
(Code 1977, § 3-29) 
Sec. 4-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 4-70 pertained to location of premises for sale of alcoholic beverages re residences, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 90-08, adopted Aug. 6, 1990, and originated from the 1977 Code, § 3-30. 
Sec. 4-71. - Distance requirements. 
No license shall be issued under this division for the sale of distilled spirits in or within one hundred (100) yards of any church building, within one hundred (100) yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or a local government, or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. No license shall be issued under this division for the sale of wine or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or a local government, or any school building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(Code 1977, § 3-31; Ord. No. 90-08, § 2, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 93-06, § 1, 10-4-93) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcohol near churches, schools, etc., O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-72. - Public hearing on application; approval. 
(a)	All applications for a license under this division shall be investigated by the police department pursuant to section 4-64. The report of the police department shall be presented to the governing body pursuant to such section. The city shall then schedule a public hearing upon the application or shall, for cause, reject the application. 
(b)	The public hearing shall be advertised pursuant to the ordinances of the city, and shall be held within three (3) weeks after the meeting of the governing body at which the report of the police department is received. 
(c)	The governing body shall, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, act upon the application for the license. 
(Code 1977, § 3-32) 
Sec. 4-73. - Time limited for obtaining license. 
(a)	All licenses granted under this article must be obtained and all fees paid within thirty (30) days of approval of application by the governing body. 
(b)	When the license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the city administrator the required fee the license shall be issued. 
(c)	The city administrator shall issue no license under this division until it has been approved by the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 3-33) 
Sec. 4-74. - Fee—Setting; minimum period; refund. 
(a)	The annual license fee for licenses issued under this division shall be set at the maximum rate allowable by state law. If no rates are set by state law, the governing body shall set the rate to be paid. 
(b)	If the licensee is denied a license by the state, upon proof of such refusal, he shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee paid to the city, less a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the costs of granting the license. 
(c)	No license shall issue for less than a calendar year period and in the case of the revocation of the license before the end of the year there shall be no entitlement to receive any refund of any portion of any license fee. 
(Code 1977, § 3-34) 
State Law reference— Limitations on license fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-43. 
Sec. 4-75. - Same—Due date; proration. 
(a)	All annual license fees under this division shall be paid in advance and on or before January first of each year. 
(b)	Any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall require the full fee, except that the fee for a new license granted after June thirtieth in any calendar year shall be fifty (50) percent of the above-stated annual license fee. 
(Code 1977, § 3-35) 
Sec. 4-76. - Licenses constitute a grant or privilege. 
All licenses granted under this division shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license and subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by the city charter, and related laws, applicable provisions of the city Code, other ordinances and state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 3-21) 
Sec. 4-77. - Transfer. 
Licenses granted under this division are not transferable except: 
(1)	Upon the death or disability of any person holding such license the same may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or lawful heirs of the deceased person or to a guardian, provided application to the governing body is made and approval obtained. 
(2)	In a partnership a partner may sell or otherwise transfer his interest to other partners or a partner who are, at the time of the issuance of the license, a party thereto. New ownership shall not, however, be brought into the business. 
(3)	In a license granted to a corporation any person holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in such corporation may purchase or otherwise acquire additional stock in such corporation. New ownership amounting to five (5) percent of the corporation shall not be brought into such corporation except by application to the governing body and approval thereof. 
(4)	Upon approval of the governing body the city administrator shall, upon payment of a transfer fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), cause the license to be transferred. 
(5)	In the event the owner of any beneficial interest shall desire to sell such interest he may do so and the license may be transferred under the following conditions: 
a.	The owner of the beneficial interest shall advertise in the newspaper of general circulation in which the legal advertisements of the city are carried and in accordance with section 4-63. This notice shall state that the owner intends to make application to the governing body to sell his interest to (name and address of proposed purchaser); 
b.	The owner and the purchaser shall make application to the governing body upon a form to be provided by the governing body; 
c.	The police department shall investigate and report upon the application pursuant to section 4-64; 
d.	The governing body shall, at its meeting next following the receipt of the police department report, either allow or disallow the proposed transfer of license; 
e.	Upon approval of license transfer the city administrator shall act pursuant to subsection (4) above. 
(Code 1977, § 3-36) 
Sec. 4-78. - Annual renewal. 
All businesses holding licenses under this division shall be required to renew their licenses annually on the forms prescribed by the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 3-37) 
Sec. 4-79. - Suspension and revocation generally. 
(a)	All licenses granted under this division are subject to revocation and suspension by the governing body and by the municipal court. 
(b)	Temporary closings and/or suspension of license for reason of public safety may be ordered by the mayor, city recorder, or chief of police. Such order shall have a duration of not more than ten (10) days and shall be issued for good cause, only. 
(c)	No license issued by the city shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon five-day written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or charges upon which the hearing shall be held. "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of any license issued under this division shall consist of the violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business, or the violation of any state or federal law or the violation of any city ordinance, other than traffic ordinances, or the falsification of any application or information in the obtaining of any license, or the renewal thereof. 
(d)	Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license the city license issued under this division is automatically suspended for the period of time the state license is in revocation. It shall be necessary to hold a valid state license in order to hold a valid city license under this division. 
(e)	Any material omission, or any untrue or misleading statement contained in an original, transfer or renewal application for a license issued under this division shall furnish grounds for denial thereof or sufficient grounds for revocation thereof, as the case may be. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3-38—3-41) 
Secs. 4-80—4-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION DEALERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of sales of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquors shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila and all other alcoholic beverages of a similar nature and a similar alcoholic content. 
Hotel shall mean every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests whether transient, permanent or residential, and in which fifty (50) or more rooms are used for sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one (1) or more public dining rooms, with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least forty (40), where meals are regularly served to such guests, the sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are in the same premises and are a part of the hotel operations. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant in their premises and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. 
Licensee shall mean an establishment holding a license to engage in the sale of distilled spirits or spirituous liquors, wines, champagnes or malt beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Lounge shall mean a separate room connected with, a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels and defined herein with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least forty (40). 
Police committee shall consist of the governing body, the chief of police, or assistant chief of police, and the city attorney. 
Premises shall mean the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink. 
Restaurant shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place regularly served, having no sleeping accommodations. Such place shall be provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least forty (40) people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one (1) meal per day shall be served at least six (6) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. The serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto; provided however, at least fifty-one (51) percent of the annual gross income must be derived from the sale of such meals served for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 115, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 4-97. - Scope. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article applies to the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption (sales by the drink). 
Sec. 4-98. - Penalty for violation. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this article by the holder of a license hereunder shall subject the holder of such license to revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 116, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-99. - Copy of article maintained on premises. 
It shall be the duty of the management of the premises licensed under this article to maintain a copy of this article on such premises and to instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 157, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-100. - Excise taxes. 
Any licensee shall be required to pay a municipal excise tax, in addition to the required state excise tax, to the city for the sale of all alcoholic beverages by the drink in the maximum amount as allowed or required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 162, 12-5-88) 
State Law reference— Excise tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-130 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-101. - Authority to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
A licensee may purchase from wholesalers licensed by the city, alcoholic beverages in sizes of one-fifth of a gallon or larger containers unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size contents, then such license holder may purchase such brand in the nearest size to such containers. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 147, 12-5-88) 
State Law reference— Purchases to be from licensed wholesalers, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-111. 
Sec. 4-102. - Licenses serving malt liquors, vinous liquors. 
Any licensee under this article shall have the right to serve malt beverages on the premises during the same hours as are permitted hereunder for the serving of spirituous liquors, wines or champagnes by the drink. Nothing hereunder is intended to repeal the hours of serving same in any other type establishment not covered under licenses permitted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 139, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-103. - Time for sales. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no licensee under this article shall sell, give away or otherwise dispense spirituous liquors, wines, champagnes or malt beverages between the hours of 11:55 p.m. Saturday and 9:00 a.m. Monday and between the hours of 11:55 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on other days. 
(b)	Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, repealed former § 4-103 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to closing hours and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, § 148, 12-5-88. 
State Law reference— Sunday sales prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-104. - Sales on election days, Christmas Day. 
Any licensee under this article shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages on any election days as permitted on any other day. A licensee under this article shall not permit the sale of any alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 154, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 90-08, § 5, 8-6-90) 
State Law reference— Sales on Sundays and election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-105. - Reuse of bottles, prohibited. 
It shall be illegal for any licensee under this article to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 149, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-106. - Prices and charges to be displayed; filed with police department. 
Any licensee under this article, except private clubs, shall display in prominent places the current prices of spirituous liquors, vinous liquors, champagnes or malt liquors by the drink; the amount of spirituous liquor to be served in each drink; admission and cover charges. The licensee shall file a copy of such prices with the investigating officer of the police department and shall furnish to any customer that so desires an itemized bill of charges which shall not exceed the price list furnished to the police department. Upon any increase or decrease of prices, a new list must be filed with the police department. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 150, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-107. - Drinks to be served by employees. 
Drinks sold under this article shall only be served by the employees of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 152, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-108. - No sales outside building. 
It shall be unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the building, premises or place of business licensed for such sale except as permitted herein. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 153, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-109. - Employment of certain persons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any premises in which spirituous liquors, wines, champagnes or malt beverages by the drink hereunder to employ any person in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers and musicians, who has been convicted, by this or any other state or by the United States or any other country, soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors. This section shall not apply to private clubs. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 155, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-110. - Employment of minors. 
No licensee under this division shall employ any minor in his establishment; provided, however, that in restaurants and hotels minors may be employed where their duties are not in any way involved with the preparation of or the sale or service of any spirituous liquors, vinous liquors, champagnes, or malt liquors by the drink; provided that this section shall not apply to private clubs, and also provided musicians and other entertainers, who are minors, may provide professional entertainment on the premises with permission of the police committee. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 156, 12-5-88) 
State Law reference— Persons under 18 dispensing alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 4-111. - Maximum seating capacity of lounges. 
No establishment holding a license under this article as a lounge shall have a seating capacity in excess of two hundred fifty (250) persons irrespective of any other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 158, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-112. - Serving of standing customers at bars prohibited. 
No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may serve any customer who is not seated, it being the purpose of this section to prohibit being served while standing at a bar or while standing in any area of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 159, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-113. - Disturbances, obscenity, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace of obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 141, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-114. - Conditions of premises. 
All premises licensed under this division shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 140, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-115. - Temporary or flashing signs to identify licensed premises prohibited; extinguishing lighted signs on Sundays. 
No temporary sign, or mobile sign, including window signs, or flashing signs shall be permitted to identify the premises of a licensee. All lighted signs identifying such premises must be fully extinguished on Sunday, except that licensees that are permitted to sell alcohol on Sundays pursuant to subsection (b) of section 4-103 shall not be required to extinguish lighted signs during the hours described in said subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 2, 12-5-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, repealed former § 4-115 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to closing hours and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, § 160, 12-5-88. 
Sec. 4-116. - Nudity restricted. 
(a)	Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; and Richmond County, Georgia; which experiences we believe are relevant to the problems faced by Palmetto, we take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among general comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of this council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars," or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)	The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve, or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on such premises within the city limits: 
(1)	The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume, or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)	Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (b)(1) or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of, or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.	Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act which is prohibited by law; 
b.	The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; and 
c.	The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)	The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) above; provided, however, that nothing contained in this subsection (b) shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater which derives less than twenty (20) percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 161, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 94-01, § 1, 4-4-94) 
Sec. 4-117. - Sale to incapacitated persons prohibited. 
No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall sell or give away, or permit the sale or gift to, or the procuring for, any such liquors to any person who is physically or mentally incapacitated due to the consumption of liquor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 6-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, adopted June 7, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new one as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, § 142, 12-5-88. 
State Law reference— Sales to intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 4-118. - Minors prohibited on licensed premises unless accompanied by parent or guardian. 
No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minor to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of a lounge unless such minors are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; provided however, that such minors shall be permitted in restaurants or private clubs without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. This section shall not apply to minors who are employees under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, 6-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, adopted June 7, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new one as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, § 143, 12-5-88. 
State Law reference— Sales to persons under 21, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 4-119. - Service in back rooms prohibited; exceptions. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms. This section shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 4, 6-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 4, adopted June 7, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new one as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, § 145, 12-5-88. 
Sec. 4-120. - Opened original packages on licensed premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a licensee, his manager or agent in charge of licensed premises, to carry into or have in his possession on any licensed premises, any alcoholic beverages in the original package, the seal of which has been broken or the original package opened. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 5, 6-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 5, adopted June 7, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new one as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, § 146, 12-5-88. 
Sec. 4-121. - Leaving premises without payment. 
Any person leaving the premises of a licensee hereunder without paying his charges shall be in violation of the law. This section shall not apply to private clubs or restaurants as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 151, 12-5-88) 
State Law reference— Theft, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-1 et seq. 
Secs. 4-122—4-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 6, adopted June 7, 2010, changed the name of Div. 2 from Spiritous Liquor Licenses to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Local licenses for sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110; licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

Sec. 4-136. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages for use or consumption on the premises without a license required in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 7, 6-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 7, adopted June 7, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new one as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, § 117(a), 12-5-88. 
Sec. 4-137. - Surveyor's certificate. 
All original applications for new licenses shall include a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed or existing premises and the straight line distance to the nearest private residence, church, alcoholic treatment center, school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 126, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 94-02, § 1, 4-4-94) 
Sec. 4-138. - Application by hotels, motels. 
Hotel and motel corporations and their franchise restaurant corporations operating as contemplated by the definition of hotel are authorized to apply for and to hold a license under this division in their corporate names and shall name on such application an agent and/or manager actively employed in the operation of said hotel, motel or franchise restaurant who shall be responsible for operation under such license as is provided for in this article and who shall qualify in all respects as to character and moral fitness under the provisions of this article. Should the manager and/or agent leave the employment of the hotel or motel corporation or its franchise restaurant corporation in the city, a new agent and/or manager will be named by the license holder within ten (10) days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 117(b), 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-139. - Privilege. 
Licenses under this division shall be mere grants or privileges and the mayor and council shall have the discretion to approve or deny any application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for use or consumption on the premises subject to the requirements of due process of law. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant a vested right in the renewal of a license to sell alcoholic beverages for use or consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 8, 6-7-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, § 8, adopted June 7, 2010, repealed the former section and enacted a new one as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, § 118, 12-5-88. 
Sec. 4-140. - Renewal of license. 
All licensees under this division shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 119, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-141. - Factors considered in issuing. 
In determining whether or not any license applied for under this division shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)	If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquors, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(2)	If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquors, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(3)	The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. When the number of alcoholic beverage-to-be-consumed licenses issued and in effect shall number more than one (1) for each five hundred (500) persons residing in the city, no further licenses of such nature shall be permitted. If a licensee shall go out of business and the number of such licenses in effect shall exceed one (1) for each five hundred (500) persons residing in the city, such license may not continue. 
(4)	The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(5)	If dancing is to be permitted upon the premises for which the license is sought, and applicant has previously permitted dancing upon any premises controlled or supervised by him, the manner in which he controlled or supervised such dancing to prevent any violation of law, regulation or ordinance. 
(6)	Whether a licensee has had a license, issued under the police powers of the city, suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 120, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 9, 6-7-2010) 
Sec. 4-142. - Conviction for felony or misdemeanor. 
No original license shall be issued to any person organized for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or his spouse, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or for any municipal ordinance except traffic violations. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, resulting in a forfeiture of a bond required by a municipal ordinance, the police committee may, after investigation, waive same as a disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 121, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-143. - Required citizenship. 
No license under this division shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all the partners. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 122, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-144. - Wholesalers holding licenses prohibited. 
No person shall hold a license under this division who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale liquor business. No financial aid or assistance to any licensee hereunder from any wholesaler or manufacturer of intoxicating liquors shall be permitted; provided, however, that this section shall not be applicable to private clubs. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 131, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-145. - City officials holding license prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or full-time appointed official of the city, or his spouse or minor children, to hold any license under this division. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 130, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-146. - Eligibility. 
No license shall be issued under this division to any applicant whose establishment does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, hotel, or lounge. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 123, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-147. - Distance from private residence, church, etc. 
No license shall be issued to any location which is within two hundred (200) feet of any private residence on the same street, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any private residence in any direction other than on the same street. No license shall be issued to any location which is within one hundred (100) yards of any church building, or any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or a local government, or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. Such distance for the purpose of this section shall be measured in all directions from the nearest wall enclosing the proposed premises where alcoholic beverages are sold to the nearest point of such residence, church, alcoholic treatment center, school, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. A "private residence" for the purpose of this section, is defined as a house or dwelling where not less than one (1) nor more than two (2) families reside, or a boarding or rooming house where there are five (5) or more boarders or roomers. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 127, 12-5-88; Ord. No. 90-08, § 4, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 93-06, § 2, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 94-02, § 1, 4-4-94) 
State Law reference— "Private club" defined, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1. 
Sec. 4-148. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
No license shall be issued under this division unless the location is located in the C-2 and C-3 zoning districts pursuant to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 137, 12-5-88) 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. B. 
Sec. 4-149. - Compliance with fire regulations. 
Where minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed in this article, the same shall be judged by reasonable standards. The fire department shall, upon request of the police committee, inspect such premises and report their finding to the committee. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 138, 12-5-88) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 9-1. 
Sec. 4-150. - Time limit on obtaining license and paying fees after approval. 
All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than four (4) weeks from the date of the approval of the application by the governing body. If not so obtained, the license shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 128, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-151. - Fee. 
An annual fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be charged for the license to sell distilled spirits, spirituous liquors, wines, champagnes or malt beverages or any combination of them for consumption on the premise except that private clubs licensed to sell such beverages shall be charged as set forth herein. A beer and wine only license fee shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) annually. All license fees hereunder shall be paid in advance on or before January 1 of each year and any license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration, except that the fee for a new license granted after June thirtieth in any calendar year shall be fifty (50) percent of the above stated annual license fee for the remainder of that calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 124, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-152. - Issued for calendar year. 
No license shall issue for less than a calendar year period, or the remainder thereof, and in case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 125, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-153. - Nontransferable; application to decedent's estate and partnerships. 
(a)	Licenses under this division shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. In case of death of any person holding such a license, or any interest herein, the same may, in the discretion of the governing body, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(b)	Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one (1) or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(c)	A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself received directly none of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the police committee. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 132, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-154. - Business to be opened within six months of receiving license. 
All holders of licenses under this division must within a six-month period, after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of the produce or products authorized by the license. Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale as referred to above within the six-month period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 133, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-155. - Discontinuation of operation for six months automatic forfeiture. 
Any holder of a license under this division who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the product or products as authorized in the license, but who shall, for a period of six (6) consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized in the license, shall upon completion of the six-month period automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of the failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any further action by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 134, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-156. - Forms; data requested. 
The police committee shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications under this division. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the police committee or the police department and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the police committee, police department or the city attorney and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce such person within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 135, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-157. - Misleading or omitted information. 
Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a license under this division shall be cause for the denial thereof. If any license has been granted under these circumstances, there shall be cause for the revocation of same. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 135, 12-5-88) 
Sec. 4-158. - Revocation of license; due cause. 
No license which has been or which may be issued by the city under this division shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and only after a hearing and upon the prior three-day written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any city ordinance other than the traffic ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 129, 12-5-88) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer shall mean "dog control officer" and shall refer to an individual employed by the health department or its designee to perform and execute the provisions of this chapter. 
Animal control shelter shall refer to the facilities operated by the health department or its designee for the confining of dogs, cats, other animals or fowl impounded under the provisions of this chapter. 
Cat shall mean cat, or any domesticated feline, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Commercial guard/security dog shall mean any dog that is purchased, leased, or rented and that is trained to guard, protect, patrol, or defend any commercial property, public or private, upon and within which it is located. 
Current vaccination license tag shall mean a vaccination/license tag bearing a number which shows the license is valid for a one- or three-year period. The licensing period runs concurrently with the vaccination period. 
Custodian shall mean any person which has been entrusted with the responsibility and care of a dog, cat, other animal or fowl by its owner. 
Dangerous dog shall mean any dog that according to the records of any appropriate authority: 
(1)	Has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
(2)	Has aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Exception: A dog is not considered potentially dangerous or dangerous if it bites a human: 
a.	When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
b.	When its owner is being attacked. 
c.	Who is a willful trespasser on the property of the owner or who is committing another tort or crime. 
d.	Who has tormented or abused it or who in the past has been observed or reported to have tormented or abused it. 
Dog shall mean dog, or any domesticated canine, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Domestic animal/fowl shall mean any animal/fowl domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition for the advantage of humans. Pen raised skunks are categorized as those skunks acceptable by the State of Georgia and may be kept in Georgia as pets. 
Exception shall mean an animal is not considered vicious if it attacks, bites, or menaces: 
(1)	When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
(2)	Anyone attacking the owner. 
(3)	Unlawful trespassers on the property of the owner. 
(4)	Any person or animal that has tormented or abused it. 
(5)	If it is defending its young or other animal. 
Exotic animal/fowl shall mean any animal/fowl of any kind which is not indigenous to the state and not included in the definition of a domestic animal/fowl, and shall include any hybrid animal/fowl which is part exotic animal/fowl. 
Harborer shall mean any person which has provided sustenance and/or shelter to a dog, cat, or other animal or fowl for a period of more than seven (7) days. 
Health department shall mean the Commissioner of Health of Fulton County, or his authorized representatives, which shall include officers or employees of The Atlanta Humane Society so long as such corporation is under contract with Fulton County and other cities of Fulton County. 
Livestock shall mean and include horses, mules, cows, sheep, goats, hogs and all other animals used or suitable for either food or labor. 
Nuisance shall mean whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render the soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome or unreasonably offends or impairs the senses of smell, sight and hearing. 
Person shall mean person, firm, corporation, municipality, society, or association. 
Potentially dangerous dog shall mean any dog that, without provocation, bites a human on public or private property at any time. 
Records shall mean records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of an animal control officer. 
Tether shall mean any chain, rope, leash, tie out, or wire designed to restrain an animal, which is attached to an animal, or to an animal's collar or halter and is also attached to a stationary object. 
Vaccinate shall mean the injection, by a veterinarian, of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine intra-muscular or subcutaneous of an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. Government license number of approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and having been approved by the state department of human resources. Vaccine used for vaccination of dogs, cats or other animals against rabies shall be refrigerated and kept under proper conditions and shall show no signs of spoilage or otherwise be unfit for producing immunity against rabies. 
Vaccination certificate shall mean a certificate provided by the state department of human resources and issued at the time of vaccination of the dog, cat or other animal and bearing thereon the signature of the vaccinator, the name, color, breed, age and sex of the dog, cat or other animal, the name and address of the owner, and the date of expiration of the vaccination, and spay or neuter status if known by the administering veterinarian. 
Vaccination/license tag shall mean a metal tag bearing a number which is issued to the animal owner after showing proof of vaccination for the animal and paying (when required) the license fee. This tag is issued on behalf of Fulton County by the health department or its designee and is provided by the state department of human resources. 
Veterinarian shall mean any person who holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state; the veterinary license number shall be the same as that recorded by the state board of veterinary examiners. 
Vicious animal/fowl shall mean any animal/fowl which, because of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure humans or other animals without provocation; or an animal/fowl which has on one (1) or more occasions caused injury to humans or other animals without provocation, whether on public or private property. 
Wildlife/fowl shall mean any animal/fowl of any kind which is indigenous to the state but not included in the definition of a domestic animal/fowl, and shall include any hybrid animal/fowl which is part wild animal/fowl. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(A), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 11-5-09) 
Sec. 5-2. - Enforcement. 
The Fulton County Board of Health or its designee shall enforce this chapter by means of impoundment and court citations. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(U), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88) 
Sec. 5-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)	Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. Each and every violation of the provisions of this article constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter as it pertains to a potentially dangerous dog will be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a second conviction, and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a third conviction. 
(c)	Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter as it pertains to a dangerous dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and will be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second conviction, and not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third conviction. 
(d)	If the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog fails to comply with section 5-56 of this chapter and his/her dog attacks or bites a human, he/she shall be guilty of a felony and will be subject to a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and/or imprisonment for not less than one (1) year nor more than five (5) years. 
(e)	If the owner of a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog fails to comply with section 5-56 of this chapter and his/her dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury to or the death of a human, he/she shall be guilty of a felony. Conviction under these circumstances will subject the owner to a fine of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and/or imprisonment for not less than one (1) year, nor more than ten (10) years. 
(f)	In addition to subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the animal control officer shall immediately confiscate the dog and place it in quarantine for a period of time as provided by the health department and thereafter humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-3 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to fees and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(Q)(6), (Q)(7), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88. 
Sec. 5-4. - Running at large; control, confinement generally. 
(a)	Generally. The running at large of dogs, domestic animals/fowl, livestock, wildlife/fowl, or exotic animals/fowl, except cats, is prohibited. Owners of wildlife/fowl or exotic wildlife/fowl must have the necessary state or federal permits on their person when transporting their animals. 
(b)	Dogs. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or harborer of any dog to allow or permit such dog to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog unless such dog is securely under leash; said leash being not more than six-feet long, and under the control of a competent person. Dogs must be confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog and shall be restrained by means of a fence or wall or other enclosure, or restrained individually by leash or chain. Excluded are those dogs participating in or training for obedience trails, field trials, dog shows, tracking work, or law enforcement. Also, the requirements of this subsection shall not apply in any area zoned for agriculture where the owner or person having custody of the dog is at the time in question using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his/her person a valid hunting license and proof of vaccination. 
(2)	An electronic confinement system shall be considered an acceptable enclosure when the equipment is property maintained and in continuous working order, and the animal to be contained within wears the appropriate electronic collar when within the system perimeters. 
(3)	In cases where an animal has been deemed dangerous by the court, or has been trained to be a guard dog, an electronic animal confinement system may not be used as either the primary or secondary enclosure. 
(4)	Individuals who contain an animal by means of an electronic animal confinement system and are found in violation of this section or have been deemed as restraining a dangerous animal shall thereafter restrain the animal by means of a fence, wall or other enclosure, or such animal shall be restrained individually by a leash or chain. 
(5)	It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog to restrain or anchor such animal by means of a tether. Notwithstanding the prior sentence, a dog may be temporarily restrained by means of a tether while the dog is attended by its owner, custodian, or harborer. 
(6)	Any tether used to temporarily confine a dog while attended by its owner, custodian, or harborer as provided in subsection (5) above, must be attached to a properly fitted collar or harness and shall not be wrapped directly around the dog's neck. Such tethers shall not be excessively heavy or weighted so as to inhibit the dog's movement. 
(c)	Restraint of domestic animals/fowl, livestock, owned wildlife/fowl and exotic animals/fowl. It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or harborer of any domestic animal/fowl, livestock, wildlife/fowl or exotic animal/fowl, except cats, to allow or permit such to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such unless securely under leash, in a carrying case or restrained by some other means and under the control of a competent person. 
(d)	Confinement of domestic animals/fowl, livestock, owned wildlife/fowl, exotic animals/fowl, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. Domestic animal/fowl, livestock, wildlife/fowl or exotic animal/fowl, except cats, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs shall be securely confined to the premises of the owner or other such person having custody of such by means set forth under the provisions of this regulation or approved by the health department or its designee or as required by state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 3, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 3, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-4 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(H)(b), (c), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88. 
State Law reference— Livestock at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-5. - Vaccination/license tag required. 
(a)	In order to maintain a centrally located record of all vaccinated dogs, cats or other animals kept, maintained or harbored in the corporate limits of the city, the owner, custodian or harborer of such dog, cat or other animal is required to apply to the Fulton-Atlanta S.P.C.A. for a vaccination/license tag. 
(b)	A vaccination/license tag shall be issued upon presentation of a certificate showing that the dog, cat or other animal for which the tag is issued has been vaccinated as prescribed by this chapter; provided that the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog in the city also makes payment of the required license fee to be set by the County Manager of Fulton County. The vaccination/license tag will be available to the public throughout the year and is issued by the health department or its designee. The tag shall be valid for the same period as the time specified by the vaccination. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or harborer of any dog in the areas designated in subsection (a) above to affix such vaccination/license tag to a collar worn by the dog at all times; except that the wearing of a vaccination/license tag is not required for show dogs where the wearing of such tag could damage the coat, and except dogs when boarded in kennels or veterinary clinics, or in an area zoned for agricultural purposes where the owner or custodian of the dog in question is using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his person a valid hunting license. In the latter case, the owner, custodian or harborer shall have the tag or vaccination certificate in his possession where it may be shown on demand by any duly constituted authority. 
(d)	Should the vaccination/license tag become lost, misplaced, or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or harborer of the dog to obtain a replacement tag at a cost as set by the County Manager of Fulton County. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination/license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove a vaccination/license tag from any animal without the consent of the owner or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(D), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 09-05, § 4, 11-5-09) 
Sec. 5-6. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, poison, cruelly treat, maim, tease, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance or medical attention, ill use, deprive of shade and shelter or in any manner whatsoever, torture, kill or abuse any animal/fowl. 
(b)	No person shall abandon any animal/fowl, on any property, public or private, or keep an animal under unsanitary conditions. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to transport any dog in an open bed truck except when safely confined in a portable/transport kennel or safely restrained by a harness or tether. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(I), 9-8-87) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4 et seq. 
Sec. 5-7. - Nuisances. 
(a)	Any vicious animal shall be deemed a nuisance. A vicious dog will be exempt as a nuisance upon classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog as prescribed in section 5-59. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animal/fowl or livestock except under the following conditions: 
(1)	Any housing or enclosure used by any domestic animal/fowl or livestock shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer. 
(2)	Domestic animal/fowl or livestock shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except that dwelling unit of the owner (exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, kennels, grooming parlors and public or commercial horse facilities): 
Animal/Fowl     Distance 
Horses, mules, asses, cows or sheep or goats ..... 150 feet 
Hogs ..... 900 feet 
Dogs (3 or more) ..... 25 feet 
Rabbits, guinea pigs ..... 25 feet 
Hamsters, chicken, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl ..... 25 feet 
(3)	Except in areas zoned for agriculture, each domestic animal/fowl or livestock shall be provided with the following average minimum floor or ground area in the enclosure or housing in which it is kept (exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, kennels, grooming parlors and public and commercial horse facilities): 
Animal/Fowl     Area per Animal/Fowl 
Horses, mules, asses, cows or sheep or goats ..... 150 square feet 
Hogs ..... 150 square feet 
Dogs ..... 100 square feet 
Rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters ..... 4 square feet 
Chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl ..... 4 square feet 
(4)	Except in areas zoned for agriculture, the maximum number of domestic animals/fowl or livestock that may be kept on any single premise shall not exceed the following (exception: licensed veterinary hospitals, kennels, grooming parlors and public and commercial horse facilities): 
Animal/Fowl     Maximum Number 
Horses, mules, asses, cows ..... 5 
Sheep, goats ..... 10 
Hogs ..... 10 
Dogs, cats ..... 10 
Rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters ..... 75 
Chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl ..... 75 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(R), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 09-05, § 5, 11-5-09) 
Sec. 5-8. - License required. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of each owner, custodian or harborer of any dog or cat over four (4) months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the city to obtain a dog license for such dog or cat. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four (4) months of age brought into the city to obtain a dog or cat license for such dog or cat within fourteen (14) days from the date of entry. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 6, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 6, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-8 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to precautions to be taken by owners of vicious animals or fowl, and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(J), 9-8-87. 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 5-9. - Skunks and foxes. 
(a)	All skunks, except pen raised skunks, and all foxes from whatever geographic region including Alaska and Canada, are forbidden to be purchased, sold, owned, possessed or harbored. (Pen raised skunks and foxes in possession as of July 1, 1987, are grandfathered.) 
(b)	Pen raised skunks, other than black and white skunks, may be purchased and kept as pets after securing a permit from the Fulton County Animal Control. The Fulton County Animal Control is responsible for ensuring that purchasers of pen raised skunks are made knowledgeable of the proper care, handling, and confinement. No pet store shall allow the purchase of pen raised skunks without being first presented with the permit issued by the Fulton County Animal Control. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 7, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 7, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-9 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(O), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88. 
Sec. 5-10. - Wildlife/fowl or exotic animal/fowl. 
Each owner, custodian or harborer of any wildlife/fowl or exotic animal/fowl must obtain all necessary state and federal permits for such animal or fowl and/or meet all state and/or federal requirements for keeping such animal or fowl. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 8, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 8, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-10 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(P), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88. 
Sec. 5-11. - Animals/fowl as prizes forbidden. 
It shall be unlawful to offer as a prize or give away any animal/fowl in any contest, raffle or lottery or as enticement for fund raising or for entry into any place of business. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(S), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88) 
Sec. 5-12. - Special permits. 
(a)	Each premises where there are four (4) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months, kept, maintained or harbored for a period of fourteen (14) days or longer, shall be deemed to constitute a kennel. The owner or person in possession of the premises where the kennel is located shall be required to apply for a special permit. 
(b)	A special permit will be issued upon payment of an annual fee set by the County Commissioners of Fulton County and proof that the premises and dogs covered by the special permit meet the requirements set out in this chapter. 
(c)	The special permit will be valid for one (1) year from date of issue; provided it is not revoked during the year for violation of this chapter. Application to renew a special permit must be made at least fourteen (14) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(d)	Individual license tags will be issued for each dog located in such a kennel and a separate tag fee over and above the annual special permit fee will not be required. 
(e)	All commercial kennels which are subject to a business license fee shall be exempt from the annual special permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(E), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 09-05, §§ 9, 19, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— This section was formerly numbered 5-58, and was renumbered by Ord. No. 09-05, § 19, adopted Nov. 5, 2009. 
Sec. 5-13. - Commercial guard/security dogs. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use or maintain any guard/security dog to have signs conspicuously posted on the premises where the guard/security dog is located to warn of the presence of the dog. This warning shall consist of a warning sign placed at each entrance and exit to the premises and in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the sign (eye level). If the premises is not enclosed by a wall or fence, a sign shall be placed at every entrance and exit to each structure on the premises in which a guard/security dog is located. Each sign shall measure at least ten (10) inches by fourteen (14) inches and shall contain block lettering stating "Warning, Guard Dog On Duty." In addition, for dogs rented or leased, the sign shall set forth the name, address and phone number of the responsible person or persons, to be notified during any hour of the day or night. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of any person who keeps, uses, or maintains a guard/security dog to ensure the dog is vaccinated against rabies and licensed as required by this chapter. The dog also must have the current vaccination tag affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times as required by this chapter. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of any person that sells, leases, and/or rents any guard/security dog to be used within Fulton County to notify the Fulton County Animal Control S.P.C.A., of the location and number of guard/security dogs in use, kept, or maintained at a particular location. The animal control office shall maintain a record of the location, number of guard/security dogs, and current rabies vaccination and licensure of all guard/security dogs utilized within the city. The person that sells, leases, and/or rents a guard/security dog to be used in the city shall furnish the following information to the Fulton County Animal Control Office: 
(1)	Name, address, and telephone number of the location where a guard dog is located; 
(2)	Name, breed, sex, current license tag information of each guard dog at any location in the city. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in an open bed truck and the vehicle transporting guard dogs shall be identified as to the business owner. It shall be unlawful to transport any guard dog in the city except under the following conditions: 
(1)	Each dog shall be placed in separate holding bins; 
(2)	Each holding bin shall be enclosed and measure at least forty-eight (48) inches long by eighteen (18) inches wide by thirty (30) inches high; 
(3)	Each holding bin will be adequately ventilated. 
(e)	No guard/security dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(f)	A guard/security dog shall be confined by the owner/custodian/harborer within a building or secure enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(L), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 09-05, §§ 9, 21, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— This section was formerly numbered 5-60, and was renumbered by Ord. No. 09-05, § 21, adopted Nov. 5, 2009. 
Sec. 5-14. - Confinement of female dogs in heat required. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, custodian or harborer of any female dog in heat within the city when she is left unattended, to securely confine such dog inside a building or other enclosure to prevent such dog from coming into contact with another dog except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(M), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 09-05, §§ 9, 22, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— This section was formerly numbered 5-61, and was renumbered by Ord. No. 09-05, § 22, adopted Nov. 5, 2009. 
Sec. 5-15. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or provision of this chapter shall be held invalid, such part shall be deemed severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 10, 11-5-09) 
Sec. 5-16. - Courts. 
The Fulton County Magistrate Court shall hear cases and assess fines for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 11, 11-5-09) 
Secs. 5-17—5-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 5-36. - Vaccination required. 
(a)	The owner, custodian or harborer of each dog or cat over four (4) months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the city is required to maintain a current rabies vaccination on such dog or cat. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four (4) months of age brought into the city from outside Fulton County to have such dog or cat vaccinated within fourteen (14) days from date of entry; provided, that when the owner or person having custody of the dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the health department through its designee that such dog or cat has a current vaccination as prescribed by this regulation, such dog or cat will not be required to be vaccinated again until the expiration date of the current vaccination. 
(c)	Only a licensed veterinarian shall be entitled in connection with his practice, on request of any owner of a dog, cat or other animal, to vaccinate such dog, cat or other animal against rabies; provided that at the time of vaccination he furnishes two (2) copies of the vaccination certificate to the owner, forwards one (1) copy to the Fulton County Animal Control and maintains one (1) copy for his files. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(B), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 09-05, § 12, 11-5-09) 
Sec. 5-37. - Rabies cases to be reported. 
It shall be the duty of any person knowing of a rabid animal or of any animal showing symptoms of rabies to immediately report such animal to the health department or its designee and give as much pertinent information as possible. Any bite by an animal shall be reported to the health department or its designee. The animal control office, in order to maintain an effective epidemiological surveillance and control program, shall maintain a record of its rabies related activities, including investigation and confirmation of rabies in animals in the manner and frequency stipulated by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(F), 9-8-87) 
Sec. 5-38. - Quarantine. 
(a)	In the event a dog or cat has bitten a human, such animal shall be immediately confined at the animal control shelter, veterinary hospital or other such premises deemed acceptable by the health department or its designee for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the bite to be observed for symptoms of rabies. 
(b)	In the event a warmblooded animal other than dog or cat has bitten a human or other warmblooded animal, or in the event a warmblooded animal has been bitten by another warmblooded animal, the recommendations contained in the rabies control manual compiled by the state department of human resources shall be followed. 
(c)	All expenses incurred for boarding an animal for the quarantine period as well as other applicable fees shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person, custodian or harborer to fail to surrender a dog, cat or other animal which has bitten a human, upon the sworn statement of the person bitten. Such animal will be placed under quarantine or submitted for laboratory examination at the discretion of the health department or its designee. The provisions of this article shall apply regardless of whether or not such animal has a current rabies vaccination and tag. 
(e)	Where rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department or its designee may designate an area within which quarantine of all owned warm-blooded animals shall be maintained. Such animals shall be immediately confined to the premises designated and in a manner approved by the health department or its designee whether or not such animals have been vaccinated against rabies. 
(f)	No warmblooded animal shall be brought into or removed from a quarantined area or premises without written approval of the health department or its designee. 
(g)	Quarantine ordered by the health department or its designee shall be maintained for such period as deemed necessary to protect the public health. 
(h)	Quarantined areas or premises where rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies remain at large, may be posted by the health department with signs which read as follows: "RABIES SUSPECTED" or "RABIES—KEEP AWAY FROM ANIMALS." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the health department and shall not be removed except by the health department. Such signs shall not be defaced. 
(i)	The owner, custodian, or harborer of each animal subject to a quarantine invoked by the health department under the terms of this regulation shall be notified of the quarantine, the particular animals subject thereto, and shall be given such other information as the health department deems necessary. 
(j)	Every animal showing clinical signs of rabies as determined by the health department shall be immediately destroyed; and/or the heads of all animals suspected of having had rabies at the time of death shall be submitted to the epidemiology office, department of human resources, for examination by the department of human resources laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(G), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 09-05, §§ 13—15, 11-5-09) 
Secs. 5-39—5-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VICIOUS ANIMALS AND DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 5-56. - Precautions to be taken by owners of vicious animals or fowl. 
(a)	No person owning or having custody or control of any dog or other animal/fowl known by such person to be vicious, dangerous or potentially dangerous shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of every owner of any vicious animal/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, or anyone having any animal in his possession or custody, to ensure that the vicious animal/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is kept under restraint as prescribed in subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this section and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the vicious animal/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, custodian or harborer, and it is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, locked pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended so that children are prevented from entry and to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from escaping. 
(c)	For owners of vicious animals/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who maintain their animal/fowl out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter of area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the vicious animal/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a locked pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides; a secure top attached to all sides; the sides must be securely set into the ground or onto a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked when the animal is unattended. This enclosure shall provide protection from the elements. 
(d)	A vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall not be upon any street or public place except when securely restrained by a leash not more than six (6) feet in length and humanely muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and in the charge of a competent person. 
(e)	Whenever outside of its enclosure as provided for in subsections (b) and (c), but on the owner's property, a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar, muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(f)	No vicious animal/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its primary enclosure. 
(g)	A warning sign (i.e., "Beware of Dog") shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious animal/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. These signs are exempt from building permit requirements. 
(h)	Failure to keep any animal/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog confined or under restraint as provided for in the section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 17, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 17, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-56 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to quarantine and destruction authorization, and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(T)(3)—(T)(5), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 5, 11-7-88. 
Sec. 5-57. - Notice to owners of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)	When an animal control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner. The notice shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)	The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)	The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within fifteen (15) days after the date shown on the notice, has the right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)	The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control hearing board; 
(5)	The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)	The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control hearing board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(b)	When the animal control hearing board receives a request for a hearing, as provided in this section, it shall schedule such hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving the request. The hearing board will notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and, in addition thereto, the hearing board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the hearing board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(c)	Within ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, the animal control hearing board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(d)	A certificate of registration to the effect the owner has a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall also be issued by the animal control officer and is contingent upon the dog owner presenting to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(1)	A proper enclosure for confinement of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog as prescribed elsewhere herein; 
(2)	The proper posting of the premises as prescribed elsewhere herein; 
(3)	An insurance policy or surety bond in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) insuring the owner against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by a dangerous dog. This shall apply to dogs classified as dangerous only. 
(e)	An annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged in addition to regular dog licensing fees, to register dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. This registration fee is subject to change as dictated by the county board of commissioners. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(f)	Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the animal control officer does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in section 5-56 of this chapter are maintained by the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration, or following the date of any renewal of such certificate. 
(g)	The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within twenty-four (24) hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died or has been sold, stolen or donated. If the dog has been sold the owner shall also provided the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. 
(h)	The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register the dog as required in this article within thirty (30) days after becoming a resident. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 18, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 18, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-57 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to licenses required, and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(C), 9-8-87. 
Sec. 5-58. - Formation of hearing board. 
(a)	The Fulton County Board of Commissioners shall create a board known as the animal control hearing board, to hold hearings provided for in section 5-57 of this chapter. The board so designated is authorized, and shall have jurisdiction to conduct hearings, and determine matters provided for in section 5-57. No member of the animal control hearing board may participate in a hearing on any matter in which a member previously participated in the classification of the dog at issue. 
(b)	The hearing board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. The initial term of members shall be as follows: 
(1)	Two (2) members to serve for one (1) year; 
(2)	Two (2) members to serve for two (2) years; and 
(3)	Three (3) members to serve for three (3) years. 
Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for terms for three (3) years and until their successors are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 19, 11-5-09) 
Secs. 5-59—5-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 20, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed § 5-59, which pertained to notice to owners of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs, and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(K), (V), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, §§ 3, 6, 11-7-88. Section 23 of Ord. No. 09-05 repealed § 5-62, which pertained to control and confinement, and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(H)(a), 9-8-87. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION 

Sec. 5-81. - Authorized. 
(a)	Any citizen may pick up and impound any animal running at large in the city, provided said animal is promptly surrendered to the Fulton County Animal Control to allow the person having the right of possession an opportunity to reclaim their animal. 
(b)	Dogs, domestic animals/fowl, livestock, owned wildlife/fowl, and exotic animals/fowl within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded: 
(1)	Dogs without a current rabies vaccination; 
(2)	Dogs without a current Fulton County license; 
(3)	Dogs not wearing a current vaccination/license tag, including dogs wearing a tag that was not issued for such dog; 
(4)	Warmblooded animals which have bitten a human or another warmblooded animal or which have been bitten by another warmblooded animal suspected of having rabies; 
(5)	Warmblooded animals suspected of having rabies; 
(6)	Unconfined warmblooded animals in quarantine areas; 
(7)	Dogs or other animals/fowl whose safety, health, or life is in immediate danger; 
(8)	Dogs, domestic animals/fowl, livestock, or exotic animals/fowl, except cats, whose ownership is unknown; 
(9)	Dogs, domestic animals/fowl, livestock, owned wildlife/fowl, or exotic animals/fowl, except cats, roaming at large; 
(10)	Vicious animals/fowl or dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs not properly confined or restrained as provided in this chapter; 
(11)	Guard/commercial/security dogs not properly confined or restrained as provided in this chapter; or 
(12)	Dogs in heat not properly confined as provided in this chapter. 
(c)	No dog or other animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section by virtue of vaccination, tag or certificate. 
(d)	A dangerous dog shall be immediately impounded by any animal control officer, or by a law enforcement officer, if: 
(1)	The owner of the dangerous dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required by this chapter; 
(2)	The dangerous dog is not validly registered as required by this chapter; or 
(3)	The dangerous dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as specified in this chapter. 
Any dangerous dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section, and upon payment of reasonable impoundment costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within twenty (20) days of the date the dog was impounded, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 25, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 25, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-81 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(N)(1), (N)(2), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88. 
Sec. 5-82. - Right of entry. 
Any animal control officer empowered to perform any duty under the rabies and animal control regulations in this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding a dog or other animal/fowl which the officer is in immediate pursuit of with the exception of any occupied building into which the dog or other animal/fowl may enter. In the latter case, if the occupant or owner of the premises gives permission to the animal control officer to enter the premises, the officer may remove such dog or other animal/fowl. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(N)(3), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88) 
Sec. 5-83. - Obstruction of officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, interfere with, hinder, resist, obstruct, or molest the animal control officer in the performance of his duties, or for any person to remove any animal/fowl from the animal control vehicle or animal control shelter without the permission of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 26, 11-5-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-05, § 26, adopted Nov. 5, 2009, repealed former section 5-83 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(N)(4), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88. 
Sec. 5-84. - Notice to owner. 
When the owner of the dog or other animal/fowl, impounded under the provisions of this article, can be readily identified and located, the health department or its designee shall notify the owner of the impoundment. A reasonable attempt to contact the owner shall be satisfied by a telephone call to the owner's residence when possible or a postcard sent to the owner's residence through the U.S. postal system. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(N)(5), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88) 
Sec. 5-85. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)	Every animal/fowl impounded under the provisions of this article which is found upon arrival at the animal control shelter to be diseased or injured, and whose ownership is unknown or is relinquished in writing, shall, at the discretion of the health department or its designee be immediately destroyed if not accepted by an organization approved by the health department or its designee and provided such organization signs a receipt for the animal/fowl. In the event an owner cannot be contacted and the severity of the injury or disease of the animal dictates that euthanasia is a humane course of action, the animal will be destroyed and the owner (if known) notified as soon as possible. 
(b)	If, in the opinion of the health department or its designee, the release of an impounded animal/fowl will impair the safety of the public, such animal/fowl will be held pending a court ordered disposition. 
(c)	Any animal/fowl impounded under the provisions of this article shall be held a minimum of three (3) days from the day of impoundment or such longer period of time as deemed reasonable by the director of animal control. Animals under observation for rabies symptoms shall remain in the animal control shelter for such period of time as the health department or its designee may deem necessary to protect the public health. Livestock shall be held a minimum of fourteen (14) days. 
(d)	Impounded animals/fowl not claimed within three (3) days of the day of impoundment or at the end of the quarantine period shall be disposed of (euthanized) in a humane manner as approved by the health department or its designee. At the discretion of the health department or its designee, animals not claimed by the person having the right of possession may be offered for adoption or placement with any person or organization approved by the health department or its designee. No animal/fowl impounded under the provisions of this article shall be released to any person or organization for the purpose of live animal experimentation. 
(e)	Before being released, the owner of any impounded animal/fowl shall pay the following: 
(1)	A vaccination fee on any unvaccinated animal when a vaccination is required by this chapter; 
(2)	A license fee for any unlicensed dog in an area covered by this chapter; 
(3)	An impoundment fee; and 
(4)	A daily boarding fee. 
(f)	The health department or its designee shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, illness, death, escape or pilfering of any animal/fowl with which it deals but shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(g)	The county manager shall establish reasonable vaccination, license, impoundment, and boarding fees. In some instances the amount of impoundment and boarding fees will be on a cost-incurred basis. 
(h)	Proceeds from license, impoundment, and boarding fees shall be applied to the annual operating budget of the Fulton County Animal Control for animal and rabies control, enforcement activity, and operation of the animal facility. 
(Ord. No. 87-4, § 4-2(Q)(1)—(Q)(5), (Q)(8), 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-08, § 4, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 09-05, § 27, 11-5-09) 
Sec. 5-86. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
(a)	The Fulton County Animal Control as a designee of the Fulton County Health Department shall cooperate with the Atlanta Humane Society and any other approved organization by offering for adoption or placement cats and/or dogs not claimed by the person having the right of possession or any cat and/or dog that may be designated as a stray. 
(b)	Organizations with a continuing interest in adopting animals from the animal control shelter must register with the Fulton County Animal Control on the forms provided and be designated as an approved adoption organization. 
(c)	All animals housed at the animal control shelter shall be under the authority of the animal control director or his/her designee. No animal will be released for adoption or placement prior to the holding period required by section 5-85(c) and with the written approval of the animal control director or his/her designee. 
(d)	The animal control director may confer ownership (permit adoption) of any animal which has become the property of the animal control shelter to an approved organization, subject to conditions prescribed by the animal control director including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Payment of any vaccination, licensing, or veterinary costs shall be the responsibility of the receiving organization; 
(2)	Evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other diseases administered; and 
(3)	Evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(e)	The Atlanta Humane Society will have the right of first refusal on adoptable animals at the animal control shelter. Other approved organizations interested in the adoption of a cat and/or dog may call the animal control shelter on Monday and Thursday morning to question the availability of adoptable animals. The animal control director may also contact an approved organization if an animal is available for adoption. No animal shall be held more than twenty-four (24) hours past the time of notification. 
(f)	The Fulton County Health Department or its designee and the City of Palmetto, Georgia shall be held harmless and free from liability for any animal adopted to or placed with an approved adoption organization. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 28, 11-5-09) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Building, electrical and plumbing regulations, § 38.1. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 9; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; fair housing, § 11-26 et seq.; unfit buildings or structures, § 17-51 et seq.; planning and development, ch. 19; soil erosion, sedimentation control and stormwater management, ch. 21; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 6-26. - Adopted. 
It is the intent of the City of Palmetto to enforce the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes, and all appendices thereto, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)	International Building Code; 
(2)	National Electrical Code; 
(3)	International Fuel Gas Code; 
(4)	International Mechanical Code; 
(5)	International Plumbing Code; 
(6)	International Residential Code for one-family and two-family dwellings; 
(7)	International Energy Conservation Code; 
(8)	International Fire Code; 
(9)	International Existing Building Code; and 
(10)	International Property Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 88-05, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-88; Ord. No. 91-03, § 1, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-27. - Appeals board. 
The governing body is hereby designated as the board of adjustments and appeals, as contained in the Standard Building Code, for the purposes of hearing any and all appeals from decisions of the chief building official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-06, § 5-21, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 91-03, § 2, 12-2-91) 
Sec. 6-28. - Fire district. 
For purposes of adopting and applying the codes adopted in this article, there is no fire district established in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5-1) 
Sec. 6-29. - Building inspection fee. 
There shall be a fee imposed for each inspection of a building under any applicable code adopted in this article. The fee shall be established from time to time as that amount deemed necessary by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 84-4, § 5-5, 9-4-84) 
Sec. 6-30. - Permit requirements for house moving. 
(a)	As a condition precedent to obtaining a permit to move a house into the city, the person seeking such permit must file with the building official the route over which he proposes to travel with such house. 
(b)	The person seeking a house moving permit must also file with the building official where such house is then presently located, so that the same may be inspected prior to being moved; the person seeking such permit must pay fifty dollars ($50.00) for such inspection with respect to any house moved into the city. 
(c)	The house to be moved into the city must in all cases meet the minimum provisions of the existing building code of the city, as they may now or hereafter exist, and the building official, after inspecting such house prior to its being moved, shall be the sole judge as to whether such house meets such building code. If, in the judgment of the building official, it does not meet the building code, then such house shall not be placed upon land within the city. The judgment of the building official shall be final as to whether such house meets the standards herein required. If, in the building official's judgment, such house does meet the standards herein required, then the building official shall issue a permit for the same without further charge for such permit. 
(Code 1977, § 5-3) 
Sec. 6-31. - Plumbing fixture requirements. 
(a)	Definitions. 
(1)	Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
(2)	Lavatory faucet means a faucet that discharges into a lavatory basin in a domestic or commercial installation. 
(3)	Plumbing fixture means a device that receives water, waste, or both and discharges the water, waste, or both into a drainage system. The term includes a kitchen sink, utility sink, lavatory, bidet, bathtub, shower, urinal, toilet, water closet, or drinking water fountain. 
(4)	Plumbing fixture fitting means a device that controls and directs the flow of water. The term includes a sink faucet, lavatory faucet, showerhead, or bath filler. 
(5)	Pressurized flushing device means a device that contains a valve that: 
a.	Is attached to a pressurized water supply pipe that is of sufficient size to deliver water at the necessary rate of flow to ensure flushing when the valve is open; and 
b.	Opens on actuation to allow water to flow into the fixture at a rate and in a quantity necessary for the operation of the fixture and gradually closes to avoid water hammer. 
(6)	Toilet means a water closet. 
(7)	Water closet means a fixture with a water-containing receptor that receives liquid and solid body waste and on actuation conveys the waste through an exposed integral trap into a drainage system and which is also referred to as a toilet. 
(8)	WaterSense TM means a voluntary program of the United States Environmental Protection Agency designed to identify and promote water efficient products and practices. 
(b)	Minimum standards. The following standards related to high-efficiency plumbing fixtures are minimum standards to be utilized in construction. These standards include without limitation, the following: 
(1)	A water closet or toilet that: 
a.	Is a dual flush water closet that meets the following standards: 
1.	The average flush volume of two (2) reduced flushes and one (1) full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.	The toilet meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: 
i.	American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; 
ii.	American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006 "Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device"; and 
iii.	Is listed to the WaterSense TM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specifications; or 
b.	Is a single flush water closet, including gravity, pressure assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank types, that meets the following standards: 
1.	The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.	The toilet must meet the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 
3.	The toilet must be listed to the WaterSense TM Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; 
(2)	A shower head that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	A urinal and associated flush valve that: 
a.	Uses no more than 0.5 gallons of water per flush; 
b.	Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; 
c.	For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSense TM specifications for flushing urinals; and 
d.	Where nonwater urinals are employed, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Nonwater urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where nonwater urinals are installed, they shall have a water distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a minimum height of fifty-six (56) inches (one thousand four hundred twenty-two (1,422) mm) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shut-off valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where nonwater urinals are installed, a minimum of one (1) water supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one (1) water supply fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing; 
(4)	A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1.5 gallons of water per minute at a pressure of sixty (60) pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSense TM High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification; and 
(5)	A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
(c)	Exemptions . The following shall be exempt from the above requirements under the following conditions: 
(1)	When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or shower heads within such existing building; 
(2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or shower heads required by this part were installed; 
(3)	When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	When units to be installed are: 
a.	Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
b.	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	Toilets for juveniles. 
(d)	Applications for exemptions. The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation and entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (c) above, shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building official for the city. A fee shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. The fee shall be as stated on the schedule of fees located in the office of the building official for the city. 
(e)	Enforcement and punishment. 
(1)	This section shall be enforced by the office of the building official of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the building official of the city, or his agent. 
(2)	Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(f)	Sub-metering requirement. No water shall be supplied nor any permit issued to any newly constructed multi-family residential building or structure or mixed use building, or to any multi-unit retail (excluding office buildings) or light industrial building or structure permitted or with permit-pending on or after July 1, 2012, unless the building or structure is built with either: 
(1)	Individual meters that measure water provided to each residential unit; or 
(2)	Private sub-unit meters owned and managed by the property owner that measure water provided to each residential unit with a utility owned master meter that measures the quantity of water to the master meter. 
Each individual unit (dwelling or tenant) shall be metered in such a way that water used by said unit can be recorded and billed. For buildings with master meters required to install sub-meters under this Code section, the property owner shall be responsible for providing, owning, operating, and maintaining the sub-meters. Nothing in this Code section shall render the city responsible for providing, owning, operating, or maintaining any sub-meter required under this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 92-02, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 2012-01, 3-5-2012; Ord. No. 2012-06, §§ 1—6, 9-4-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-01, adopted Mar. 5, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as § 6-31(h). Due to amendments made by Ord. No. 2012-06, §§ 1—6, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, these provisions have been included as § 6-31(f). 
Secs. 6-32—6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

Sec. 6-101. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these procedures is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes". 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-102. - Code remedial. 
(a)	General. The construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)	Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)	Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of the construction codes shall not be constructed as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan, or their adequacy. Neither the City of Palmetto, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-103. - Applicability. 
(a)	General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)	Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(c)	Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(d)	Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in the International Fuel Gas Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(e)	Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(f)	Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(g)	Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(h)	Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(i)	One-family and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code for one-family and two-family dwellings, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one-family or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(j)	Existing buildings. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings. 
(k)	Property maintenance. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the maintenance of all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and shall constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance. 
(l)	Unsafe buildings. The provisions of article VI herein pertaining to nuisance abatement provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(m)	Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction; of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(n)	Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(o)	Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(p)	Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-104. - Building department. 
There is hereby established a department to be called the building department (the "department") and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
(1)	Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service system, or in the making of plans or specifications thereof, unless he/she is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his/her duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(2)	Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(3)	Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)	Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the department during the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-105. - Existing buildings. 
(a)	General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)	Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing buildings or structures is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-106. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Secs. 6-107—6-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 6-111. - General. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-112. - Right of entry. 
(a)	Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)	When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-113. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-114. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)	Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)	Violation of Code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-115. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structure or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of article XII herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-116. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-117. - Alternative materials and methods. 
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Secs. 6-118—6-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 6-121. - Permit application. 
(a)	When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
EXCEPTION: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)	Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)	Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)	Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)	Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
(5)	Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)	Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)	Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(b)	Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where those are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)	Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)	Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)	Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-122. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)	Requirements. When required by the building official, two (2) or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)	Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)	Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his/her official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)	All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)	Buildings and structures three (3) stories or higher. 
(3)	Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) square feet (four hundred sixty-five (465) square meters) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
EXCEPTION: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)	Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structure and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)	Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)	Hazardous occupations. The building official may require the following: 
(1)	General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)	Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-123. - Examination of documents. 
(a)	Plan review. The building official shall examine, or cause to be examined, each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)	Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-124. - Issuing permits. 
(a)	Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, the building official shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)	Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with the refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason(s) for refusal. 
(c)	Special foundation permit. When an application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed, and, pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his/her discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his/her own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)	Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application to the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in Chapter ____________ [sic] of the International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-125. - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted In each case where the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-126. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)	Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the work is commenced. One (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more than ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit. An extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)	Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)	Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One (1) set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-127. - Fees. 
(a)	Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. An amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(b)	Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)	Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)	Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing the application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(e)	Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-128. - Inspections. 
(a)	Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine, or cause to be examined, any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. The building official shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. The building official shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(b)	Manufacturers and fabricators . When deemed necessary by the building official, he/she shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufactured or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(c)	Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by paragraph (f) of this section. The building official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)	Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)	Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such a position as to permit the building official or his/her representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)	Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his/her agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his/her agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)	Building. 
a.	Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.	Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)	Electrical. 
a.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)	Plumbing. 
a.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.	Note: See section ____________ [sic] of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
(4)	Mechanical. 
a.	Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.	Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)	Gas. 
a.	Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.	Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)	Energy. 
a.	Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.	Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.	Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(g)	Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three (3) inspections. 
(h)	Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)	Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his/her agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-129. - Certificates. 
(a)	Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)	Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)	Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)	Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of the building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)	Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two (2) sets of detailed drawings or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)	Certificate of completion. 
(1)	Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. 
(2)	Before issuances of a certificate of completion, all as-built plans shall be required to be submitted to the city in electronic computer aided design (CAD) format while referring to the standards as set forth by the City of Palmetto As-Built CAD Standards. Construction will not be approved until these standards are met. 
(3)	This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)	Service utilities. 
(1)	Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)	Temporary classroom. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)	Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate all immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 2012-09, 12-3-12) 
Sec. 6-130. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)	Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he/she is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)	Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the department. 
(c)	Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Secs. 6-131—6-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TESTS 

Sec. 6-141. - Requirements. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Secs. 6-142—6-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - APPEALS 

Sec. 6-151. - Decision of the building official. 
The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his/her duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the board of commissioners whenever any one (1) of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)	The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)	The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)	That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)	The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-152. - Notice of appeal. 
Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-153. - Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. 
In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 6-154. - Decisions. 
The board of commissioners shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two (2) weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Secs. 6-155—6-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 

Sec. 6-161. - Misdemeanor. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 6-4-07) 
Secs. 6-162—6-170. - Reserved. 
Chapter 7 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power to regulate and license businesses, § 27.1 et seq.; power to grant franchises for use of streets, § 29.1. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; avoiding payment of cable fees, O.C.G.A. § 46-3-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Additional service shall mean any communications service other than basic service provided over its CATV system by a grantee directly or as a carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates, or any other person engaged in communications services including, but not limited to, burglar alarm, data, or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading and home shopping. 
Administrative officers shall mean the mayor, city administrator or other chief administrative officer of the city, or his designate. 
Applicant shall mean any person submitting an application to the city for a franchise to operate a CATV system under the terms and conditions set forth by the governing body. 
Basic service shall mean the simultaneous delivery by the grantee to television receivers (or any other suitable types of audio-video communication receivers) of all subscribers in the city of all signals of over-the-air television broadcasts required by the FCC to be carried by a CATV system. "Basic service" shall also include grantee channels, city channels, except as may be designated for special purposes by the administrative officer, public channels and additional channels at the option of the grantee, or as directed by the governing body. 
CATV or community antenna television system shall mean any facility which: 
(1)	In whole or in part receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one (1) or more television and AM and PM radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services. 
(2)	Distributes by cable or wire news, weather and other information including civil defense type information as required as an incidental part of CATV service to all subscribers without additional charge. 
(3)	Distributes any and all other lawful communications of a specialized nature. 
Provided that it shall not mean or include any facility to which is transmitted any special television program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in a manner commonly known and referred to as pay television, except as may be permitted by the federal, state, and/or local regulatory agencies. 
Certificate of compliance shall mean approval required by the FCC in order for a grantee of a CATV franchise to begin operation within the city. 
Channel shall mean a band of frequencies, six (6) megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum which is capable of carrying either one (1) audio-video television signals. 
City channels shall mean channels on the CATV system which are reserved by this chapter for use by the city. 
Commercial subscriber shall mean a purchaser of any service delivered over the system who is not a residential subscriber. 
FCC or Federal Communications Commission shall mean that agency as presently constituted by the United States Congress, or any successor agency. 
Grantee shall mean the person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the governing body under this chapter or anyone who succeeds the person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
Grantee channels shall mean the channels on the system which are reserved by this chapter for the carriage of program material originated by a grantee and the retransmission of broadcast signals in accordance with the FCC's cable casting rules and regulations. 
Gross subscriber revenue shall mean all revenue derived from the monthly charges from all subscribers. 
Pay television shall mean the delivery over the CATV system of video signals in intelligible form to residential subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for basic service) on a per program, per channel or other subscription basis. 
Public channels shall mean channels on the CATV system which are reserved for carriage of program material provided by persons who lease channel time and, if necessary, studio facilities, from a grantee for the presentation of programs. 
Residential subscriber shall mean a purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
Street shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and its grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting CATV system transmission over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a CATV system. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-1, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-2. - Procedures. 
(a)	Any injury, proceeding, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the administrative officer and the governing body in regard to the operations of grantee's cable television system other than as provided in subsection (c) of this section shall be taken only after thirty (30) days' public notice of such action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the city; a copy of such action or proposed action is served directly on grantee; and the grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at hearing as may be specified by the administrative officer and governing body, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)	The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the persons in authority to whom such response should be addressed, and such other procedures as may be specified by the administrative officer and governing body. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date and time of such hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which such participation may be obtained. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)	An informal complaint shall be submitted to the administrative officer and governing body in writing and shall contain the name and address of the complainant, the name of the cable system against which the complaint is made and a complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(1)	Upon receipt of any informal complaint, the administrative officer and governing body will forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the system. Within such time as may be prescribed by the administrative officer and the governing body, the system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the administrative officer and governing body of its refusal or inability to do so. If the system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the administrative officer and the governing body in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (2) hereof. The administrative officer and governing body will forward a copy of the system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the administrative officer and governing body, and the administrative officer and governing body will forward a copy of such notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. 
(2)	If a system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the administrative officer and governing body, a statement must be filed with the administrative officer and governing body setting forth when and how the complainant has been satisfied. 
(3)	When a complaint has not been satisfied pursuant to subparagraph (2) hereof, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the administrative officer and governing body in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the administrative officer and governing body must be filed within six (6) months from the date of the administrative officer's notice of refusal of inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the administrative officer and governing body must take reference to the date of the complaint filed with the administrative officer and governing body and that it is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the administrative officer and governing body. If no complaint is filed with the administrative officer and governing body within the six-month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his complaint, and such complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-28, 11-26-79) 
Secs. 7-3—7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISE 

Sec. 7-26. - Authority to grant. 
The governing body is authorized to grant the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the streets of the city for a period of fifteen (15) years from and after the passage, acceptance and effective date of the franchise, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided, and such right, privilege and franchise may be granted to any qualified applicant who, upon the proper showing, shall fulfill all the requirements and conditions of this chapter and franchise. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-2, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-27. - Term. 
The franchise, authority or permit granted grantee herein shall terminate fifteen (15) years from date of grant and may be renewed for successive fifteen-year terms on the same terms or conditions as contained herein, or such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the governing body, and consistent with the requirements of Rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-3, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-28. - Application. 
(a)	No CATV franchise or renewal thereof shall be issued except on a written application and upon a form approved by the governing body. 
(b)	The form shall set forth such facts in detail as the governing body may deem appropriate including: 
(1)	If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignments for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this chapter. 
(2)	If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of said corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)	If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the federal securities and exchange commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)	A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)	The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all CATV facilities and shall demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)	A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the CATV system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)	A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of service. 
(c)	The governing body may request such other information as it may deem appropriate. 
(d)	All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the governing body, and intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejections or for termination of the franchise. 
(e)	All applications shall be considered firm offers to the city, shall be signed and verified by the applicants and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
(f)	Any information requested above or by the mayor and council at the time of application, which for any reason shall later change or otherwise become incorrect, shall be amended in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such change. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-4, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-29. - Payments. 
(a)	The grantee shall pay to the city, on or before March thirty-first of each year, a three (3) percent franchise fee based on gross subscriber revenues received for cable television operations in the city for the preceding calendar year. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed, except that the governing body may impose a fee in excess of three (3) percent but no more than five (5) percent gross subscriber revenues received from cable television operations in the city, provided that the FCC certifies, after appropriate showing made by grantee, that a franchise fee in excess of three (3) percent but not greater than five (5) percent will not interfere with the effectuation of federal regulatory goals in the field of cable television and after appropriate showings made by the governing body that the franchise fee in excess of three (3) percent but no greater than five (5) percent is appropriate in light of the city's planned regulatory program for cable television. A grantee shall file with the city within thirty (30) days after expiration of each calendar year during the period the franchise shall be in force a financial statement showing in detail the gross annual subscriber revenues as defined herein of grantee during the preceding year. It shall be the duty of a grantee to pay to the city at the time of filing such statement the sum hereinabove prescribed. A grantee shall also file within ninety (90) days following the conclusion of each fiscal year of a grantee an annual report prepared and audited by an independent certified public accountant acceptable to the city showing the yearly total gross subscriber revenues and payments to the city and any further relevant financial information in regard to the grantee as may be required by the administrative officer and governing body. 
(b)	In the event the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the basic fifteen-year term, a grantee shall immediately submit to the city a financial statement prepared as before required showing the gross subscriber revenues of a grantee for the time elapsed since the last period for which a grantee has paid to the city the required percentage of gross annual subscriber revenues, and a grantee shall pay to the city not later than thirty (30) days following the termination of the franchise a like percentage of such revenues and any other such sums legally due and owing to the city. 
(c)	In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a) and (b) hereof, interest on such payments shall apply from such date at the yearly rate of eight (8) percent. 
(d)	The city shall have the right to inspect a grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the franchise. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or for any other performances or obligation of grantee hereunder. 
(e)	Payments of compensation made by a grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-5, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-30. - Insurance. 
(a)	At all times during the term of the franchise, grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the city executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payments of premiums for the following: 
(1)	A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of a grantee under franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per personal injury or death of any one (1) person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or death of any two (2) or more persons in any one (1) occurrence. 
(2)	Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned by the operation of grantee under the franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for property damage to any one (1) person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage to two (2) or more persons in any one (1) occurrence. 
(3)	One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all other types of liability. 
Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(b)	All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in form satisfactory to the city and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city, and they shall require thirty (30) days written notice of any cancellation to both the city and a grantee herein. A copy of such policy shall be filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-6, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-31. - Surety bond. 
(a)	A grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agree that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise a faithful performance, license and franchise bond running in favor of the city, written by an approved corporate surety in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned that a grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties thereof for all damages resulting from the failure of a grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of the franchise. 
(b)	A grantee shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond and shall keep the same in force and effect at all times throughout the term of the franchise, including the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(c)	The bond shall contain a provision that shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to thirty (30) days after written notice to that effect is given to the city and a grantee herein. 
(d)	The bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the city, and a duplicate copy of it, along with written evidence of payment of the required premiums, shall be filed with the city during the term of the franchise. 
(e)	In lieu of said bond a grantee may deposit with the city the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) upon the granting of a franchise. Such ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be a nonrefundable deposit held by the city to insure performance by grantee. The city shall, however, take all franchise fees as herein provided for out of such deposit as they become due. Once ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in franchise fees have been paid then no further deposit shall be required and the grantee shall resume direct fee payments to the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-7, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-32. - Indemnity. 
The grantee shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnity, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions and employees against any land and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage. 
(1)	These damages or penalties shall include but shall not be limited to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. 
(2)	A grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above. These expenses shall include but not be limited to all out of pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-8, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-33. - Transfer, assignment. 
(a)	The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a grantee or by operation of law without the consent of the governing body. The granting, giving or waiving of any one (1) or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. 
(b)	The consent or approval of the governing body to any assignment, lease, transfer or sublease of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets. 
(c)	Prior approval of the governing body shall be required where ownership or control of more than ten (10) percent of the right of control of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already owns or controls ten (10) percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively, at the date the franchise is granted. By its acceptance of the franchise, a grantee specifically agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the governing body shall constitute a violation of this chapter by a grantee. 
(d)	Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the CATV system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing by a grantee from another person so such CATV system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-24, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-34. - Grantee to have no recourse. 
(a)	Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the city, nor for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)	A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise. 
(c)	A grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)	A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against a grantee and in favor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-29, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-35. - Failure of city to enforce the franchise; no waiver of the terms thereof. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the city upon any one (1) or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-30, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-36. - Time essence of agreement. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence, and any failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to revoke the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-31, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-37. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the city in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the city had no power or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-32, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-38. - Rights reserved to the city. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)	To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city. 
(2)	To determine through the governing body any question of face relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-33, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-39. - Acceptance. 
This chapter and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by grantee and filed with the city administrator. Such agreement shall incorporate grantee's written application to the city for the CATV franchise and shall bind grantee to the provisions of the application. The governing body may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-34, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-40. - Extension of city limits. 
Upon the annexation of any territory to the city (other than through a governmental consolidation process, as to which the city makes no agreement), the right and franchise hereby granted shall extend to the territory so annexed to the extent the city has authority. All facilities owned, maintained or operated by grantee, located within, under or over streets of the territory so annexed, shall thereafter be subject to all terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-35, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-41. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)	In addition to all the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee hereunder in and to the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	A grantee shall by act or omission violate any term or condition of this chapter and within thirty (30) days following written demand by the city shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)	Any provision of this chapter shall be finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and the governing body further finds that such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise herein granted. 
(3)	A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged a bankrupt or all or part of grantee's facilities are or are to be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemable by grantee within thirty (30) days from such sale. 
(4)	A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city or subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(b)	A grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-27, 11-26-79) 
Secs. 7-42—7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 7-61. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
(a)	A grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agency thereof, and if any state or federal law or regulation shall require a grantee to perform any service or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service or shall permit a grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any laws or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, a grantee shall notify the administrative officer to the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation of law and the laws or regulations of the city or franchise, and a grantee shall be governed by the advice of the administrative officer. 
(b)	The grantee shall be subject to all city ordinances as set forth herein, and grantee shall also be subject to all applicable rules and regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the FCC for CATV systems. 
(c)	If the governing body determines that material provision of this chapter is affected by such subsequent action, the governing body shall have the right to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-23, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-62. - Modification of FCC rules. 
Consistent with the requirements of Rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC, any modification of Rule 76.31 resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be considered as a part of the franchise as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall be incorporated in such franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the governing body within one (1) year from the effective date of the FCC's amendment or at the time of renewal of the franchise, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-38, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-63. - Filing communications with regulatory agencies. 
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by a grantee to the FCC, SEC or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting CATV operation shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-24, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-64. - Books and records of grantee. 
(a)	A grantee shall file with the city engineer a copy, true and accurate, of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer and shall be kept continuously up to date. 
(b)	A grantee shall continually keep on file with the city a current list of its shareholders holding over three (3) percent of the outstanding stock and officers with their current addresses. 
(c)	All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the city shall be made available for inspection and audit by the administrative officer or his designate within thirty (30) days after any request for such inspection or audit shall be made. 
(d)	Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a grantee for the operation of CATV under the franchise shall be filed with the city and at the local office of a grantee. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-9, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-65. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)	All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of said streets. The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all adopted city and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)	Except when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber and not simply because it shall be more convenient, economical or profitable for a grantee to so operate, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the city engineer, under such conditions as he shall prescribe for the public welfare, a grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the streets of the city for the conduct of its CATV system but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under such terms and agreements as a grantee negotiates with these companies. The city shall cooperate with a grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use such facilities. 
(c)	No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the CATV system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on any existing pole within the city until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of such cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys or highways within the city where such installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a grantee to the city engineer and approved by that department in writing. 
(d)	Should a grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the streets of the city other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then in that event, before a grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for grantee any of such property in the street, the nature of such property shall be disclosed to the city engineer for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the street and only installed under such conditions as he shall prescribe concerning such location or installation. 
(e)	Whenever the city or state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of the streets of the city, it shall be the obligation of a grantee, upon notice of such requirement to remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonable necessary to meet the requirements of the city or state within seventy-two (72) hours. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of a grantee. 
(f)	Whenever, in any place within the city, all the electric or telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a grantee to locate or to cause its property to be located underground within such places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilities shall be located underground in any place within the city after a grantee shall have previously installed its property, nevertheless, a grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in such places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expense paid by the property owner. 
(g)	A grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of a grantee. 
(h)	In case of disturbance of any street caused by a grantee, a grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city engineer, replace and restore such street in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Provided, where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(i)	A grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one (1) year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents, provided such maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by grantee. 
(j)	A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removing or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and a grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. In the event of a disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit, such disagreement will be resolved by the city engineer. 
(k)	If at any time in case of fire or disaster in the city it shall become necessary, in the judgment of the administrative officer or the chief of the fire department, to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done, and the repairs thereby rendered necessary shall be made by a grantee, at its own cost and expense and without charge against the city. 
(l)	A grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved, or adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-11, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-66. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)	Within ninety (90) days after the acceptance of the franchise, a grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems of their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)	The grantee, within twelve (12) months from the date the FCC certifies grantee's compliance with its rules and regulations governing cable television operations in and for the city, shall extend energized trunk cable to fifty (50) percent of the city and shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the city within six (6) months thereafter unless additional time is granted by the governing body upon request by grantee for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-12, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-67. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)	A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five (5) subscribers within six hundred sixty (660) feet of its system, shall extend such system to such subscriber at no cost to the subscriber for system extension other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers. The six hundred sixty (660) feet shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. 
(b)	In addition, the city engineer may, upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the city, order the extension of the system to such subscriber after opportunity for hearing and notice to a grantee. In such cases, the city engineer, in his discretion, may order such extension to any subscriber only upon payment by the subscriber of the actual cost of the extension. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-13, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-68. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
The applicant shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed, and a grantee shall be required by the city engineer to update this section of its proposal in keeping with the advances in the state of the art of CATV systems design. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-14, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-69. - Operational standards. 
(a)	The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the industry to the end that the subscriber may receive the highest and most desirable form of service. 
(b)	In determining satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the following, among other things, shall be considered: 
(1)	That the CATV system is installed and remains capable of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum and that it shall have the further capability of converting UHF for the distribution to subscribers on the VHF band. 
(2)	That the CATV system as installed is capable of transmitting and passing the entire color television signals without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence. 
(3)	That the CATV system is designed and capable of twenty-four (24) hours a day continuous operation. 
(4)	That the CATV system is capable of and will produce a picture upon any subscriber's television screen in black and white or color (provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture) that is undistorted and free from ghost images and accompanied by proper sound assuming the technical, standard production television set is in good repair and that the television broadcast signal transmission is satisfactory. In any event, the picture produced shall be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(5)	The CATV system shall transmit or distribute signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound in all television receivers of all subscribers without causing cross modulation in the cables or interference with other electrical or electronic systems. 
(6)	That the CATV system as installed has a minimum capacity of twenty (20) channels. 
(7)	That a grantee shall provide, upon request and without charge, one (1) outlet providing basic service to each public office building, fire station, police station and public school that is passed by its cable. If more than one (1) outlet is required at any of the said locations, a grantee shall install at the cost of time and material only, and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at such locations except for additional outlets or service beyond the basic service. 
(8)	That a grantee shall make its studio facilities, including color cameras and other equipment, available for use by public schools for local organization programs and for closed circuit educational films subject to reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to such use be grantee and in such manner as to not unduly interfere with the cable television operations of a grantee. Services rendered to all users by a grantee under the terms of the franchise shall at all times be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(9)	That a grantee shall provide at least one (1) free dedicated noncommercial public access channel to be available. 
(10)	That a grantee shall reserve at least one (1) channel solely for educational use on a developmental basis, and that upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five (5) years thereafter at least one (1) channel will be made available free. 
(11)	That a grantee shall reserve at least one (1) channel solely for use by state and local governments on a developmental basis and that, upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five (5) years thereafter at least one (1) channel will remain free. 
(12)	That the CATV system shall be installed with the capacity for two-way communication in accordance with the regulations of the FCC now in effect or which may be promulgated. 
(c)	A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for such good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(d)	A grantee shall maintain an office in the county which shall be open during all usual business hours, have necessary listed telephones, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-15, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-70. - Supervision by city. 
(a)	A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system subject to the supervision of the governing authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)	The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
(c)	The city engineer may, from time to time, issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	If at any time the powers of the governing body or any agency or official of the city are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency of official, the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this chapter or by law in the governing body or any agency or official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-16, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-71. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)	Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its CATV system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one (1) or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)	A grantee ceases to operate the CATV system for a continuous period of six (6) months from the date of such occurrence. 
(2)	A grantee fails to construct such system as hereinabove and hereafter provided. 
(3)	The franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided herein. 
(b)	A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the city setting forth one (1) or more of the occurrences hereinabove enumerated or such other occurrences hereinbefore or hereinafter provided and shall have ninety (90) days from the date upon which the notice is received to remove such properties as hereinabove required. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-17, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-72. - Operational reports. 
(a)	Within six (6) months from the acceptance date of the franchise, a grantee shall submit to the city engineer and the administrative officer an installation plan for the entire city, indicating the date on which a grantee expects the installation of the CATV system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the city. 
(b)	A grantee shall furnish the city engineer with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. Such periodic reports shall be furnished at three-month intervals, the first report to be made three (3) months after the construction commencement date. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-18, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-73. - Off-the-air programming. 
(a)	A grantee shall carry the signals of all television stations licensed to communities within thirty-five (35) miles of the city pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. 
(b)	A grantee may also transmit or distribute the full output on FM radio stations provided that a grantee transmits or distributes all of the FM stations whose broadcasting studios are now located within the city or within thirty-five (35) miles of the limits thereof. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-19, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-74. - Cable casting on city and public channels. 
For the presentation of programming on public channels, a grantee shall make available free time and, if necessary, adequate studio facilities to members of the public. Appropriate technical assistance shall also be furnished by a grantee. Time shall be provided on a first-come, first-served basis, except that a grantee shall endeavor to grant such channel time to as many different persons as is practical, it being the intention of the governing body that such public channels serve as a significant source of diversified expression. In order that there is a maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, such programming shall be free from any control by a grantee as to program content, except as is required to protect a grantee from liability under applicable law. The governing body may direct that a grantee discontinue, or not deliver, a program on the public channel which it finds to be essentially promotional or otherwise related primarily to the conduct of a business, trade or profession, provided, however, this provision shall not be construed as a prohibition of advertiser-supported programming on public channels. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-20, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-75. - Local event blackout. 
If any local event within the metropolitan area is blacked out or not telecast within the area pursuant to and within the terms of any agreement by or with the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of such event, such event shall not be transmitted or delivered by a grantee notwithstanding the source of such event or its TV picture signals except under the rules and regulations adopted by the F.C.C. The word "event" means any live entertainment or sports contest. A grantee shall be required to show proof of written permission if requested. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-21, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-76. - Emergency use of the facilities. 
(a)	In the event of any emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of the administrative office, make available its facilities to the city at no cost for emergency use during the period of such emergency or disaster and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
(b)	A grantee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability for an emergency override alert whereby the city, in times of crisis, may be able to introduce a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-22, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-77. - Preferential or discriminatory practices. 
A grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, connection and service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of grantee. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-26, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-78. - Local office. 
During the term of the franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain in the city a local business office or agent. The provisions of this section shall be complied with if the grantee maintains a local business headquarters office within ten (10) air miles of the center of the city; provides the administrative officer and governing body with the name, address and phone number of a resident of the county who will act as grantee's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters; and at least once a week informs all subscribers by appropriate announcement (e.g., by a slide card) over the system's originations cablecasting channel of the name, address and phone number of the grantee's registered agent for the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-36, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 7-79. - Pay television. 
A grantee shall not engage in pay television except under conditions affirmatively authorized by the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 79-8, § 5A-37, 11-26-79) 
Secs. 7-80—7-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FRANCHISES AND LICENSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 2001, amended the Code with the addition of articles IV—VI, sections 7-100, 7-110—7-117 and 7-120—7-123, pertaining to telecommunications services franchises and licenses. For organizational purposes, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as article IV, divisions 1—3, sections 7-100, 7-110—7-117, 7-121 and 7-122 at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 7-100. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: 
(1)	Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; 
(2)	Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; 
(3)	Each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and 
(4)	Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
City means the City of Palmetto. 
City council means the mayor and council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Control or controlling interest means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person, including, but not limited to, a person's compliance with a franchise or revocable license, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise, and the beneficial ownership of shares representing ten (10) percent or more of the votes entitled to be cast by a corporation's voting shares shall create a rebuttable presumption of control. 
Facility services means the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of conduit or related facilities in the streets by a person for sale or lease to third parties, other than affiliated persons, that use such conduit or related facilities for the transmission of telecommunications services, but such person does not itself provide telecommunications services, but such person does not itself provide telecommunications service or cable service to such third parties or any locations or other persons in the license area. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets by a telecommunications system to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority, and responsibility to provide facility services along licensed routes pursuant to a license, or to construct, install, operate and maintain a telecommunications system as necessary to: 
(1)	Furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; 
(2)	Provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or 
(3)	Transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
May is permissive. 
Ordinance means this article and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in section 7-110 of this article. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications systems means the system, plant, equipment or property within the streets in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Secs. 7-101—7-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 7-110. - Granting authority. 
(a)	No person shall use or occupy the streets to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided, or use or occupy the streets to provide facility services, without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this article to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(b)	A person shall not use or occupy the streets to operate a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this article. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: 
(1)	May be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services or facility services; 
(2)	Shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed five hundred (500) linear feet; or 
(3)	Shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. 
In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this section 7-110, then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(c)	The city council may grant one (1) or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(d)	The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(e)	Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provisions of telecommunications services, private telecommunications services or facility services. 
(f)	A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(g)	The grant of franchises and revocable licenses by the city of persons constructing, operating or maintaining a telecommunications system shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Sec. 7-111. - Franchise applications. 
(a)	Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as they city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)	Any applications for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license: 
(1)	Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable, and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)	For the purpose of determining who controls applicant, a detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including the following: 
a.	The names and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.	The names and business addresses of all persons having control over the applicant; 
c.	Financial information sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system, or to provide facility services, in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law; and 
d.	For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system, or provide facility services, in compliance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare with respect to the applicant's use of the streets, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant and the areas served by such systems. 
(3)	In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the telecommunications system or facility services to be constructed in the streets, which shall include the following: 
a.	A map indicating the location of the system or facility services in the streets, and an estimated construction schedule, if known; and 
b.	A statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; 
(4)	To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references reasonably pertinent to the city's management of the streets or the compensation to be paid to the city, which shall be required or requested by the council or by any other provision of law. 
(c)	Non-refundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(1)	Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)	Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in [an amount to be determined by the city] by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Palmetto, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in [an amount to be determined by the city] by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Palmetto. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city shall reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Sec. 7-112. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives to the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Sec. 7-113. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Sec. 7-114. - Evaluation criteria. 
An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services are provided, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors: 
(1)	The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, 
(2)	Demonstration of adequate financial and technical ability to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, which such demonstration may be made by an adequate bond, security fund, and/or such other demonstration that is reasonably acceptable to the city, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or Federal Communications Commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(3)	The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)	The willingness and the ability of the applicant to meet construction requirements and to abide by all conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise (including any terms or conditions imposed pursuant to section 7-116 of this article), any public, health, safety and welfare requirements reasonably related to the applicant's use of the streets, and the city's management of streets; and 
(5)	To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations reasonably deemed pertinent by the city for managing the streets and safeguarding the interests of the city and the public in the streets, and for ensuring the city receives fair and reasonable compensation for use of the streets. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services and in accordance with applicable law, other than section 253 of the Communications Act which is not applicable to persons providing only private telecommunications services or facility services, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Sec. 7-115. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)	The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)	After considering such information provided pursuant to this article as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain at which such application(s) shall be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)	The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)	The city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this article and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 7-114 of this article. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements in order to grant a franchise or revocable license to an applicant when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(e)	Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Sec. 7-116. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
(a)	The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)	The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five (5) years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five (5) years; 
(2)	The franchise area authorized by the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(3)	The compensation to be paid to the city; 
(4)	The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or canceled; 
(5)	The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(6)	For the limited purpose of ensuring that the grantee is complying with the terms of the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, the city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)	Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)	The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records with respect to its obligations under the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)	Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods in the streets; 
(10)	Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)	Provisions to ensure adequate oversight by the city of the grantee's use of streets and compliance with the franchise or revocable license; 
(12)	Provisions relating to an assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license or the telecommunications system that results in a change in control; 
(13)	Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(14)	Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all licenses and permits necessary to provide telecommunications services by use of the city's streets from any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)	Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of city operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements of the telecommunications system, or from the provision of facility services; 
(16)	Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the telecommunications system, or the provision of facility services; and 
(17)	Such other provisions as the city reasonably determines are necessary or appropriate to permit the city to manage its streets or ensure compliance with the franchise or revocable license, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(b)	The city administrator shall make available to an applicant a model franchise or revocable license, as applicable, containing the terms and conditions the city seeks to impose pursuant to section 7-116. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Sec. 7-117. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services or facility services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than five hundred (500) linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city, or unless the use or occupation of the streets is for the provision of facility services. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Secs. 7-118—7-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7-121. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Sec. 7-122. - Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services. 
This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems used to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of this article, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 11-5-01) 
Secs. 7-123—7-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FRANCHISE FEES 

Sec. 7-200. - Franchise fee for stated issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of three (3) percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 7-201. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes (mayor, city administrator or city clerk), upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the three (3) percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 3-3-08) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, § 7.1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - State law governs elections. 
City elections shall be conducted pursuant to the Georgia Municipal Election Code [O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.]. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4) 
Sec. 8-2. - Voter eligibility. 
Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered with the Fulton or Coweta County board of registrars shall be eligible to vote in a municipal primary election. 
(Code 1977, § 8-2) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-123. 
Sec. 8-3. - Qualification by candidates; time. 
(a)	Candidates for any office must qualify at least twenty-two (22) days prior to and no more than fifty-two (52) days prior to any election. The actual dates of qualification shall be determined by the mayor and council. 
(b)	The entrance fee for qualifying for mayorshall be determined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-3-90. The entrance fee for qualifying for a councilperson shall be determinedf by O.C.G.A. § 21-3-90. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7; Ofrd. No. 89-50, 10-2-89) 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. 
Sec. 8-4. - Polling place. 
The city hall is designated as the polling place. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5) 
State Law reference— Fixing of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163 et seq. 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; fireworks, § 14-74; false fire alarms, § 14-112; burning on streets or public ways, § 22-4; littering prohibited, § 24-156. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; fire protection and safety generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; authority to provide fire protection standards, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; false alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - International Fire Code adopted. 
(a)	The 2012 edition of the International Fire Code, as prepared by the International Code Council and as amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs from time to time, is hereby adopted by the City of Palmetto in conjunction with the Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner, Section 120-3-3. 
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the City of Palmetto and the Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner, the more restrictive provisions shall govern. Any other provisions of the City Code that are more restrictive than the provisions of this section shall govern over the provisions of this section. 
(b)	In addition, the following appendices to the 2012 edition of the International Fire Code are hereby adopted by the City of Palmetto: 
(1)	Appendix B: Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings; 
(2)	Appendix C: Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution; and 
(3)	Appendix D: Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2014, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 3-2-09. 
Sec. 9-2. - Smoke detectors. 
(a)	(1)	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f) of this Code section, every new dwelling and every new dwelling unit within an apartment, house, condominium, and townhouse and every motel, hotel, and dormitory shall be provided with an approved listed smoke detector installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. 
(2)	Every dwelling and every dwelling unit within an apartment, house, condominium, and townhouse and every motel, hotel, and dormitory which was constructed prior to July 1, 1987, shall have installed an approved battery operated smoke detector which shall be maintained in good working order unless any such building is otherwise required to have a smoke detector system pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13. 
(3)	Every patient sleeping room of every nursing home shall be provided with no less than an approved listed battery operated single station smoke detector installed in accordance with their listing. Such detectors shall be maintained in good working order by the operator of such nursing home. This paragraph shall not apply to nursing homes equipped with automatic sprinkler systems. 
(b)	In dwellings, dwelling units, and other facilities listed in subsection (a) of this Code section, a smoke detector shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to each group of rooms used for sleeping purposes. Where the dwelling or dwelling unit contains more than one story, detectors are required on each story including cellars and basements, but not including uninhabitable attics; provided, however, that hotels and motels which are protected throughout by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner of the State of Georgia shall be exempt from the requirement to install smoke detectors in interior corridors but shall be subject to all other applicable requirements imposed under O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13. 
(c)	In dwellings, dwelling units, and other facilities listed in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this Code section with split levels, a smoke detector need be installed only on the upper level, provided the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level, except that if there is a door between levels then a detector is required on each level. Such detectors shall be connected to a sounding device or other detector to provide an alarm which will be audible in the sleeping areas. 
(d)	Detectors shall be listed and meet the installation requirements of N.F.P.A. 72. In addition, a one and one-half (1½) hour emergency power supply source is required on all detection systems required by this Code section, except where battery operated smoke detectors are allowed. 
(e)	Any complete automatic fire system using automatic smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. 72. 
(f)	(1)	The provisions of this Code section may be enforced by building and fire code officials of the City of Palmetto in the case of residential buildings which are not covered by O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; provided, however, that this Code section shall not establish a special duty on said officials to inspect such residential facilities for compliance with this Code section; provided, further, that inspections shall not be conducted for the purpose of determining compliance with this Code section absent reasonable cause to suspect other building or fire code violations. The City of Palmetto, when enforcing this Code section, shall retain any fines collected pursuant to this subsection. 
(2)	Any occupant who fails to maintain a smoke detector in a dwelling unit, or other facility, other than a nursing home, listed in subsection (a) of this Code section in good working order as required in this Code section shall be subject to a maximum fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), provided that a warning shall be issued for a first violation. 
(3)	Any operator of a nursing home who fails to install and maintain the smoke detectors required under paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this Code section shall be sanctioned in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-2-6. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 3-2-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, adopted March 2, 2009, repealed former section 9-2, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 83-4, § 10-13, 9-6-83. 
Sec. 9-3. - Open burning. 
(a)	Generally; exceptions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning in any area of the city except as follows: 
(1)	The area to be burned shall be no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet of any structure, residential, commercial or otherwise; 
(2)	No more than one (1) pile per site no larger than six (6) feet by six (6) feet; 
(3)	Destruction of combustible demolition or construction materials either on site or transported to a burning facility approved by the chief or transported to a burning facility approved by the chief of fire department unless prohibited by local ordinance and/or regulation; 
(4)	The burning-over of any forestland by the owners of such land; 
(5)	For recreational purposes of cooking food for immediate home consumption, with the following exceptions: 
a.	Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within ten (10) feet of combustible construction. This exception shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings. 
b.	Liquefied petroleum gas-fueled cooking devices. LP-gas burners having an LP-gas container with a water capacity greater than 2.5 pounds (nominal one (1) pound LP-gas capacity) shall not be located on combustible balconies or within ten (10) feet of combustible construction. This exception shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)	Fires set for purposes of training firefighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental entity and the guidelines set forth by the chief of fire department are strictly observed; 
(7)	Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage; 
(8)	For weed abatement, disease and pest prevention; 
(9)	Operation of devices using open flames, such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment; 
(10)	Setting and maintenance by contractors and tradesmen of miscellaneous small fires necessary to such activities as street paving work installation or repair of utilities provided that such fires are kept small in size, no smoke emissions exceed forty (40) percent opacity and that local ordinances and regulations do not prohibit such actions; 
(11)	Open burning in other than predominately residential areas for the purpose of land clearing or construction of right-of-way maintenance provided the following conditions are met: 
a.	Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population. 
b.	The location of the burning is at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any dwelling location in a predominantly residential area. 
c.	The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimized. 
d.	Heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber or any materials other than plant growth are not being burned. 
e.	No more than one (1) pile sixty (60) feet by sixty (60) feet or equivalent is being burned within a nine-acre area at one (1) time. 
(12)	Disposal of all packaging materials previously containing explosives in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulations; 
(13)	Pits to be utilized for burning, no more than one (1) pit per site, with a maximum dimension of thirty (30) feet in length, thirty (30) feet in width and eight (8) feet in depth; 
(14)	For pits being used for burning material, an air curtain destructor shall be used at all times during burning; 
(15)	All burning shall begin no earlier than 9:00 a.m., and said burning shall cease at 6:00 p.m. the same day. At 6:00 p.m., all fires will be extinguished, and there will be no overnight burning under any circumstances; 
(16)	All open burning shall be attended by a competent person at all times. The person responsible shall provide whatever is necessary for the extinguishment of fires at all times; 
(17)	The chief of the fire department shall have the authority to order no open burning due to conditions prevalent. 
(b)	Conditions to exceptions. In those counties whose total populations as listed in the latest census exceeds sixty-five thousand (65,000), the only legal exceptions to the general prohibition against open burning shall be exceptions (a)(1), (2), (4) through (6), (9), (10) and (12) above; provided, however, that such burning, whenever feasible, shall be conducted between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. If adequate disposal facilities for the particular combustible materials involved are not reasonably available, the other items under subsection (a) shall also be permitted except that in no event shall the open burning of more than one hundred (100) cubic yards per day of material described in exception (11) of subsection (a) be permitted unless the person performing such burning shall have first given the director two (2) days' written notice of the time and place of such burning. 
(c)	General prohibition. Beginning January 1, 1996, all open burning shall be prohibited during the months of May, June, July, August and September. The only exceptions to the general prohibition against open burning during the months of May, June, July, August and September shall be: 
(1)	For the recreational purpose of cooking food for human consumption; 
(2)	Fires set for the purpose of training firefighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental entity and the guidelines set forth by the chief of the fire department are strictly observed; 
(3)	Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used; 
(4)	Setting and maintenance by contractors and tradesmen of miscellaneous small warming fires for their workers; and 
(5)	Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production and harvesting of crops with the appropriate forestry permit. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 96-03, § 1, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 09-03, §§ 3—5, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-4. - Life Safety Code adopted. 
The National Fire Prevention Association Life Safety Code, also known as the N.F.P.A. 101, Life Safety Code, 2012 Edition, and as thereafter amended from time to time by the N.F.P.A. in conjunction with the Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner, Section 120-3-3, is hereby adopted as the Life Safety Code of the City of Palmetto. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 6, 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2014, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-03, § 6, 3-2-09. 
Sec. 9-5. - Enforcement. 
(a)	The Chief of the Palmetto Fire Department and/or his or her designees are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of Chapter 9 of this Code. Citations for violations may be issued by the fire chief and/or his or her designees. 
(b)	Any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity in violation of Chapter 9 of this Code shall be tried before the Municipal Court of the City of Palmetto. Upon conviction, a violation of Chapter 9 of this Code may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 7, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-6. - Key boxes. 
(a)	Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secure openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require that a key box be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official. 
(b)	Where the fire department has had multiple emergency response delays at such locations due to the complications and malfunctions of the gate openings, the fire marshal is authorized to require the property to retrofit these gates with an approved Knox key switch device. 
(c)	The operator of the building shall immediately notify the fire code official and provide the new key when a lock is changed or rekeyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the key box. 
(d)	The Knox Box and Knox key switch Fire/Law Enforcement Rapid Entry System shall be the required key box and key switch systems to be utilized in the City of Palmetto. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 8, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-7. - Permits required. 
A permit shall be required for certain types of structures and uses. These include, but are not limited to: 
(a)	Amusement buildings (an operational permit is required to operate a special amusement building); 
(b)	Blasting; 
(c)	Carnivals and fairs; 
(d)	Demolition; 
(e)	Dry cleaning plants; 
(f)	Hot works (application of roof covering with the use of an open-flame device); 
(g)	Fire works; 
(h)	Open burning; and 
(i)	Temporary membrane structures, tents of more than two hundred (200) square feet, and canopies of more than four hundred (400) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 9, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-8. - License for temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
(a)	Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings contained herein: 
(1)	Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Products Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally means Roman candles. The term "consumer fireworks" shall not include those items defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1(b). 
(2)	Consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124. 
(3)	Distributor means any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership which sells consumer fireworks. 
(4)	Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. The term "fireworks" shall not include those items defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1(b). 
(5)	NFPA 1124 means the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles , 2006 Edition. 
(6)	Nonprofit group means any entity exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 
(b)	License required. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1, no distributor of consumer fireworks shall be permitted to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand within the municipal limits of the city unless said distributor has obtained a license from the fire department for the city. Such a license shall be granted only upon a finding by the fire department that the following criteria have been satisfied: 
(1)	The distributor has complied with all the requirements of Chapter 10 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
(2)	The distributor maintains at all times public liability and product liability insurance with minimum coverage limits of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) to cover the losses, damages, or injuries that might ensue to persons or property as a result of selling consumer fireworks; 
(3)	The distributor has a license issued by the safety fire commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(b) or (d) for a location applicable to the location of such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2(b)(6)(B); 
(4)	The distributor has no more than the allowable temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2(b)(6)(B); and 
(5)	The sales of consumer fireworks from such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall accrue to the benefit of a nonprofit group, with said nonprofit group directly participating in operating the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(c)(3). 
Any license issued pursuant to this section shall identify the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand applicable to such license and shall expire ninety (90) days after the issuance of such license. 
(c)	Application. A license shall be issued to a distributor by the fire department upon submission of an application, which shall be in writing and upon such form as may be provided by the fire department. The fire department shall make a determination as to whether a distributor has satisfied the requirements for a license as provided in subsection (b) of this section within fifteen (15) days of submission of an application. If no determination is made within such time, or if a distributor desires to seek an appeal of the fire department's determination, a distributor may seek review by following the process provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(c)(2). 
(d)	License fee. The fee for a license issued pursuant to this section shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) payable to the city. All fees received by the city pursuant to this section shall be expended for public safety purposes. 
(e)	Operational requirements. All distributors holding licenses issued by the fire department for the operation of temporary fireworks retails sales stands shall comply with the following operational requirements: 
(1)	The distributor shall comply with the requirements for temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands in the selling of consumer fireworks as provided for in NFPA 1124; and 
(2)	The temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a fire hydrant of the city or a fire department connection of a building affiliated with such consumer fireworks retail sales stand, unless the fire chief provides in writing that such temporary fireworks retail sales stand may operate in excess of one thousand (1,000) feet from such fire hydrant or fire department connection. 
(f)	Revocation of license. Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of said license. 
( Ord. No. 2015-08, § 1, 12-7-2015 ) 
Secs. 9-9—9-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE LANES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-11, §§ 1—16, adopted Sept. 4, 1990, amended the Code by adding § 9-3, which provisions have been redesignated by the editor as Art. II, §§ 9-21—9-36, for purposes of classification and to facilitate indexing. 
Cross reference— Municipal court sessions, § 15-1; traffic, Ch. 23; traffic regulations, § 23-36. 

Sec. 9-21. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the City of Palmetto Fire Lane Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 1, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 9-22. - Purpose and scope. 
It is the declared purpose of this article to provide for the designation and identification of fire lanes; for the manner, method and language for the posting of signs; to establish the penalty for the violation of this article; to identify and designate the persons who have the authority to enforce this article and the limits of such authority; to prohibit parking in fire lanes; to provide for the method of submitting properties to this article to repeal all existing ordinances in conflict herewith and for other purposes. 
Sec. 9-23. - Definitions. 
The words used in this article shall have their normal accepted meaning except as set forth herein: 
Authorized emergency vehicle: A motor vehicle belonging to a public utility corporation and designated as an emergency vehicle by the department of public safety; a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or a certified private vehicle belonging to a firefighter or a firefighting association, partnership, or corporation; an ambulance; or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, or local law enforcement agency provided such vehicle is in use as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use it for that purpose. 
City: Palmetto, Georgia, a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia. 
Enforcement officer: Any duly sworn fire or police officer employed by the city. 
Fire lane or fire access road : A road or other passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane or fire access road is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus. 
Parking citation: An order issued out of court by an enforcement officer of the city directing a violator of this article to comply with all penalties as set forth herein. 
Plat: Any map which depicts the location and boundaries of the fire lane(s) and all existing fire lanes in accordance with this article. Note: These maps shall be drawn to scale. 
Property owner: Each person, firm, corporation or entity possessing any estate, unusfruct or leasehold right in the property being designated by fire lanes. 
Roadway: Any street, private street or fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 3, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 09-03, § 10, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-24. - General specifications; approval; maintenance. 
(a)	Accessibility. All premises which the fire department may be called upon to protect in case of fire and which are not readily accessible from public roads shall be provided with suitable gates, access roads and fire lanes so that all buildings on the premises are accessible to fire apparatus. 
(b)	Surfaces. Means and access for fire department apparatus shall be constructed of a hard all-weather surface adequately designed to support the heaviest piece of fire apparatus likely to be operated on the fire lane, private street or parking lot lane. 
(c)	Buildings and facilities. Approved fire lanes or fire access roads shall be provided for every facility, building, or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction of the City of Palmetto. The fire lanes or fire access roads shall comply with the requirements of Section 503 (Fire Apparatus Access Roads) of the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, and shall extend to within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility. 
(d)	Dimension. Fire lanes or fire access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than twenty (20) feet except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503 of the I.F.C. and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches. Dead-end fire lanes or fire access roads in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire apparatus. 
(e)	Turns. Turns in roadways shall maintain the minimum road width and shall be constructed with a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet at the inside curbline and a radius of fifty (50) feet at the outside curbline. 
(f)	Approval; maintenance. All fire lanes shall be approved by the fire official pursuant to these regulations, and thereafter the dedicated fire lanes shall be maintained by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 4, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 09-03, §§ 11, 12, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-25. - Identification signs. 
The areas designated as fire lanes shall have signs posted meeting the following criteria: 
(1)	Signs shall meet fire department specifications. The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, shall be approved by the fire marshal. Fire lanes approved by the fire marshal shall have a red painted curb in addition to the standard sign. The standard no parking sign shall be no smaller than twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches and shall state: "FIRE LANE - NO PARKING." In addition, below said statement each sign shall read "TOW AWAY ZONE." It shall be the property owner's responsibility to have their fire lanes marked with red curbs and the signs described above. Signs shall have a white background and red border with red letters and numbers and shall be reflective. Marking and maintenance of all signs and curbs are the sole responsibility of the property owners. 
(2)	Signs shall be erected perpendicular to the direction of and facing the traffic they are intended to serve. One (1) sign shall be posted at the beginning of the fire lane and one (1) at the end of the fire lane. 
(3)	Sign posts and their foundations and sign mountings shall be constructed so as to hold signs in proper and permanent position to resist swaying in the wind or displacement by vandalism. 
(4)	Signs shall be placed back a minimum of two (2) feet from the face of the curb to the leading edge of the sign. The distance between the grade and the lower edge of the sign shall be seven (7) feet. 
(5)	Signs shall be spaced at intervals not to exceed fifty (50) feet along the designated fire lane. Signs shall be clearly visible from both directions of approach. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 5, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 09-03, § 13, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-26. - Erection of fire lane signs. 
No person or property owner shall place, erect or maintain any sign for control of parking or traffic which includes the words FIRE LANE unless such location has been designated a fire lane by a fire official. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 6, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 9-27. - Violations generally. 
The parking of any vehicle, other than an authorized emergency vehicle, in a fire lane shall be punishable by an administrative fine as provided in sections 9-35 and 9-36. Enforcement of this section shall be through a civil action in the city court by issuance of a citation. The citation shall be delivered to the person in possession of said vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 7, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 9-28. - Enforcement authority. 
Any duly sworn firefighter or law enforcement officer employed by the city shall have the authority to enforce and ensure that no vehicles are allowed to park in or obstruct an approved fire lane. This is to include delivery trucks and vehicles operated by vendors. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 14, 3-2-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-03, § 14, adopted March 2, 2009, repealed former section 9-28, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 90-11, § 8, 9-4-90. 
Sec. 9-29. - Liability—Of owner and/or operator of motor vehicle. 
The lessee or owner of any motor vehicle shall not be liable for the violation of any provision of this article if such vehicle was not in the lessee's/owner's possession or control at the time of the issuance of the citation. However, it is incumbent upon the lessee or owner to notify the clerk of the city court in which case is pending of the name and address of the person or persons who, with the permission of the lessee or owner, were operating the vehicle on the date the violation occurred. If the lessee/owner fails to submit such notice, the city court may find the lessee/owner of the motor vehicle liable for the violation. For purposes of civil action, it shall be presumed that the owner of said vehicle is in control and possession thereof. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 9, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 9-30. - Same—From enforcement of article re maintenance and clearing of fire lanes. 
The city assumes no liability for any damages, injuries or deaths resulting from the enforcement or lack of enforcement of the laws pertaining to maintenance and clearing of the fire lanes. The city has the authority to issue individual citations for fire lane violations, but the owner or his representative of a building adjacent to a fire lane has the ultimate responsibility for keeping the fire lane free of obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 10, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 9-31. - Enforcement—Of property placed signs. 
The disregard or disobedience of the instruction of any fire lane sign placed in accordance with the provisions of this article by the driver of a motor vehicle shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of law without requiring proof by whom and by what authority such sign was erected. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 11, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 9-32. - Same—Suspended; indemnity. 
Enforcement of sections 9-21 through 9-31 at a specific location shall be suspended only upon written agreement between the city and the property owner. This agreement shall also make the property owner solely responsible for any damages, injuries or deaths arising from the lack of enforcement of this article. The property owner shall also be required by the agreement to indemnify, release and hold harmless the city and any other person, board, councilperson or agent from any cause of action which relates either directly or indirectly to the suspension of the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 12, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 9-33. - Exceptions. 
All buildings constructed prior to 1990 shall not automatically be subject to this article. Properties may become subject to this article by submitting a petition from the property owner or his duly authorized agent requesting that this article apply. The petition shall be submitted to the fire official, and, upon approval, the property owner shall become subject to this article and any revisions hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 13, 9-4-90) 
Sec. 9-34. - Fire lane descriptions for fire official. 
Properties which shall fall within the jurisdiction of the fire department shall have all fire lane delineations visually depicted on a plat. The plat(s) shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk for approval. The area(s) to be designated as fire lanes shall be delineated in red ink. The plat shall state a scale of measurement and shall be submitted on eight and one-half by eleven-inch white paper. The plat shall specify the name and address of the property and the length of the proposed fire lane(s). 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 15, 3-2-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-03, § 15, adopted March 2, 2009, repealed former section 9-34, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 90-11, § 14, 9-4-90. 
Sec. 9-35. - Fines—Minimum/maximum schedule. 
Violation of any provision of the city fire lane ordinance shall be punishable in accordance with a schedule of minimum and maximum fines approved by the city court. 
Sec. 9-36. - Same—Where payable. 
Fines and/or penalties in the prescribed amount as indicated by the city court can be paid at the police department, or the offender may appear in court on the court date and time set by the issuing officer. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 16, 9-4-90) 
Secs. 9-37—9-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 9-41. - New buildings and/or structures. 
All new buildings and/or structures, including but not limited to multifamily residential structures such as apartments, townhouses, condominiums, duplexes, and triplexes and one-family dwellings with side yard set backs of five (5) feet or less, shall be protected throughout by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the current State of Georgia adopted edition of N.F.P.A. 13, 13R, and 13D Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. A sprinkler control valve and water flow device shall be provided for each floor. This is not to restrict the fire marshal form requiring the installation of a water-based fire protection system and/or smoke detection system if, in the opinion of the fire official and for the public interest, the health and welfare of the firefighters, and the protection of human life, such a system would serve to benefit all parties that may be affected by the type of construction, hazard of content, limited access to the structure, and for other purposes. The kind of system shall be determined by the requirements of N.F.P.A. 13, 13R, and 13D, based on the type of construction and the tenants' ability to evacuate. Residential sprinklers shall be provided within dwelling units, apartments, and guest rooms. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 16, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-42. - Existing buildings and/or structures. 
(a)	For the purposes of this article, "new buildings and/or structures" shall include any existing building or structure, other than single family residential structures, including but not limited to multifamily residential structures such as apartments, townhouses, condominiums, duplexes, and triplexes, and one-family dwellings with side yard setbacks less than ten (10) feet which shall be deemed to be new in the event of substantial renovation or a hazard of serious consequence. For the purpose of this article, the term "substantial renovation" shall mean any construction project involving exits or internal-external features of such building or structure costing more than or equal to fifty (50) percent of the building's or structure's gross assessed value according to county tax records at the time of such renovation, repair, remodeling, or replacement thereof. 
(b)	Existing buildings, when required to have automatic sprinkler protection by subsection (a) above, shall be retrofitted for automatic sprinklers as required by the fire official in accordance with N.F.P.A. 13, 13R, and 13D, when the cost of renovation exceeds fifty (50) percent of the latest approved value of the building. These buildings shall be required to upgrade in the renovation to meet all current codes, standards, and ordinances as applicable to required fire protection and life safety systems. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 16, 3-2-09) 
Secs. 9-43—9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FALSE ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 9-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the responsibilities of those persons who purchase, rent, or use alarm systems, devices, or services. This article is also intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of these systems, devices, and services and to ensure that police and fire department personnel will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual emergencies as a result of responding to false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 17, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-52. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the respective meanings: 
Alarm shall mean and include any fire, robbery, burglary, holdup, medical, or panic alarm that transmits any signal (audible, visual, or silent) to the city, indicating a predetermined emergency condition exists whether the alarm is received: 
(1)	By telephone line to a designated position on an alarm panel; 
(2)	By a private alarm service company and relayed to the city; 
(3)	By an automated telephone alarm system playing a recorded message when received by the city; or 
(4)	By a signal relayed to the city by a third party. 
False alarm shall mean the activation of an alarm system to which the city responds and the investigating police officer or firefighter determines that none of the emergencies for which the alarm system has been installed have in fact occurred. 
Habitual false alarms shall mean more than three (3) false alarms by a single alarm system within a 30-day period. 
Telephone alarm system shall mean any alarm system which automatically transmits by telephone. 
Response shall mean the dispatch of any police or fire unit to premises where an alarm has been activated or the arrival of an officer to the location by any means of notification. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 17, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-53. - Number of false alarms; free response limited. 
Every establishment or residence within the city limits having an alarm system, including those alarms which are audible or visible on premises, shall be entitled to report a combined maximum of three (3) false alarms to which the city responds without charge in a 30-day period. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 17, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-54. - Natural disturbances not counted against limitation. 
Wherever four (4) or more alarms from separate establishments or residences within the city are received on the control panel or by telephone at the law enforcement center or fire department within any 30-minute period, which subsequently turn out to be false alarms, the alarms shall be presumed to be caused by natural disturbances, such as electrical storms, etc. No charge shall be imposed by the city for false alarms occurring during such periods nor shall false alarms occurring during such periods be counted toward the allowance described in section 9-53 above. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 17, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-55. - Grace period for new installations. 
No alarms shall be counted during the initial thirty (30) days from the date of each new installation. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 17, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-56. - Response fees for false alarms. 
Upon receipt of the third false alarm during a 30-day period, the city shall issue a warning notice to the occupant advising that a response fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be imposed for each subsequent false alarm received by the city during the following one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 17, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 9-57. - Penalties for habitual false alarms or failure to pay response fee. 
In addition to response fees, citations may be issued for habitual false alarms and/or failure to pay response fees. The defendant shall be required to appear in court to answer the charge(s). Upon conviction, the court shall require the defendant to pay a minimum court fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to all response fees. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 17, 3-2-09) 
Chapter 10 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, adopted April 2, 2007, repealed the former Ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-65, and enacted a new Ch. 10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 87-2, Art. 1, §§ B—D, Art. 2, Art. 3, §§ A—G, Art. 4, §§ A—D, and Art. 5, §§ A—E, adopted April 6, 1987. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; planning and development, ch. 19; soil erosion, sedimentation control and stormwater management, ch. 21; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL. 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)	Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)	Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-2. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City of Palmetto. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-3. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The city administrator of the City of Palmetto or his or her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-4. - Basis for area of special flood hazard—flood area maps and studies. 
For all purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)	The flood insurance study (FIS), dated May 7, 2001, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas acquired by the City of Palmetto through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for unincorporated Fulton or Coweta counties, dated May 7, 2001 or August 2, 1982, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)	Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.	Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Palmetto; or 
b.	Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city administrator. 
(3)	Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.	Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Palmetto; or 
b.	Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the city administrator. 
(4)	The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Palmetto City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-5. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-6. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-7. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Palmetto or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-8. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 10-4. All streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction is any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before April 6, 1987. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots in which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 6, 1987. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map of FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Functionally dependant use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after April 6, 1987, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 6, 1987. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city administrator to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership, or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)	The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)	In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Secs. 10-9—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS. 

Sec. 10-36. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city administrator a permit application on a form provided by the city administrator for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-37. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)	Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.	Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthern fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.	For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.	Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.	Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.	Proposed grading plan; 
f.	Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.	Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.	If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.	Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)	Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 10-82; 
d.	For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 10-81; and 
e.	Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)	Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-development and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)	Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)	All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-38. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-39. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)	Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to meet the provisions of articles III and IV; 
(4)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)	When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the city administrator shall obtain certificaion of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)	Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Secs. 10-40—10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT. 

Sec. 10-61. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)	Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)	For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city administrator. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city administrator, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-62. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city administrator. If floodway data is not available from the city administrator, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-63. - General standards. 
(a)	No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)	Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)	Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)	Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)	Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)	Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)	Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-conditions flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)	Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two (2) percent; 
(3)	Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)	Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 10-64; 
(5)	Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)	Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city administrator using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-64. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 10-84 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city administrator prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)	Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city administrator. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)	Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)	The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-65. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris, or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachments in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in item 2 below; 
(2)	Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)	If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city administrator until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-66. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city administrator may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City of Palmetto) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Secs. 10-67—10-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 10-81. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)	New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 10-63—10-65 have been met; 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)	Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
(12)	If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-conditions elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-82. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 10-81, shall apply: 
(1)	Residential buildings. 
a.	New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-63—10-65 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 10-63—10-65 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevated the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 10-81(5). 
b.	Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 10-81(5). 
(2)	Nonresidential buildings. 
a.	New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-63—10-65 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 10-63—10-65 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city administrator. 
b.	Substantial improvements. Substantial improvements of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the city administrator to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city administrator. 
(3)	Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 10-81(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)	Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on site must either: 
a.	Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings - substantial improvements (section 10-82), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)	Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.	New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-63—10-65 have been met. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 10-81. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-83. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)	Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)	Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-84. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the city administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection 10-81(5). 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-85. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)	All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 10-81(5). 
(2)	Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-86. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood-elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)	All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(c)	All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 10-37; 
(d)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(e)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(f)	All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Palmetto to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Secs. 10-87—10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES. 

Sec. 10-101. - Variance and appeals procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the city administrator or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)	Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the city administrator. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city administrator. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)	Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city administrator shall have the right to appeal such decision to the zoning board of appeals as established by the City of Palmetto in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the zoning board of appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)	In reviewing such requests, the city administrator and zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)	Conditions for variances: 
a.	A variance shall be issued only where there is: 
1.	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.	Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.	The city administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)	Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city administrator and zoning board of appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city administrator and the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)	Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Secs. 10-102—10-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 10-110. - Violation provisions. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-111. - Notice of violation. 
If the city administrator determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city administrator by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Sec. 10-112. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city administrator shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city administrator may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)	Stop work order. The city administrator may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city administrator may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city administrator may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city administrator may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)	Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the city administrator shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city administrator has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city administrator may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the appropriate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 4-2-07) 
Chapter 11 - HUMAN RIGHTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1—11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fair housing, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-200 et seq.; local fair housing ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-213. 

Sec. 11-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Discriminatory housing practice shall mean an act that is unlawful under section 11-27, 11-28 or 11-29. 
Dwelling shall mean any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Family shall include a single individual. 
To rent shall mean to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-201. 
Sec. 11-27. - Unlawful practices in selling or renting dwelling; exceptions. 
(a)	Except as exempted by subsection (b) of this section or section 11-30, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)	To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
(2)	To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
(3)	To make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4)	To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)	For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
(b)	Nothing in this section, other than paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this section, shall apply to: 
(1)	Any single-family dwelling sold or rented by an owner if: 
a.	Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family dwellings at any one (1) time; 
b.	Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three (3) such single-family dwellings at any one (1) time; 
c.	Such dwelling is sold or rented: 
1.	Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
2.	Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (c) of this section; but nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)	Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his residence. 
(3)	In the case of the sale of any such single-family dwelling by a private individual owner not residing in such dwelling at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such dwelling prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four-month period. 
(c)	For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)	He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)	He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)	He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-202. 
Sec. 11-28. - Unlawful discrimination in making loans or other financial assistance. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, religion, sex, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given, provided that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in subsection (b) of section 11-27. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-203. 
Sec. 11-29. - Unlawful denial of access to, or membership or participation in, service, organization, or facility relating to business of selling or renting dwelling. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-204. 
Sec. 11-30. - Permissible limitations in sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings by religious organizations or private clubs. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, or national origin. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-205. 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power to regulate and license businesses, § 27.1 et seq.; taxation and finance, § 30.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-61 et seq.; alarm systems, ch. 3; alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; commercial guard or security dogs, § 5-60; cable television, ch. 7; massage establishments, ch. 13; vehicles for hire, ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal taxation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-05, § 5, adopted Dec. 5, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 12-1, which pertained to adjustment of taxes by county tax commissioners and derived from Code 1977, § 9-2. 
Sec. 12-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-05, § 5, adopted Dec. 5, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 12-2, which pertained to delinquent tax, penalty and interest, and derived from Code 1977, § 9-3, and Ord. No. 93-07, § 1, adopted Nov. 1, 1993. 
Secs. 12-3—12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 1995, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 12-16—12-45, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977, §§ 6-1, 9-4; Ord. No. 83-5, adopted Dec. 15, 1983; Ord. No. 84-5, adopted Dec. 4, 1984; Ord. No. 88-12, adopted Jan. 3, 1989; and Ord. No. 94-05, §§ 1—4, 6, adopted Dec. 5, 1994. Prior to repeal and reenactment by Ord. No. 94-05, Art. II pertained to business license taxes and fees. 

Sec. 12-16. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city administrator or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-17. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)	Wherever the term "city" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Palmetto, Georgia. 
(b)	As used in this article, the term: 
(1)	"Administrative fee" means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)	"Location or office" shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project and a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
(3)	"Occupation tax" means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(4)	"Regulatory fees" means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(5)	"Person" shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, non-profits, or any other form of business organization. 
(6)	"Practitioner of profession or occupation" is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(7)	"Employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-18. - Fee structure. 
(a)	A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up of those accounts. 
(b)	A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses for the purpose of regulating the business through necessary verification to legally permit operation of that business for the current licensing year. The following, although not exclusive, is a list of businesses which would be required to pay a regulatory fee: 
(1)	Building and construction contractors, subcontractors and workers; 
(2)	Carnivals; 
(3)	Taxicabs and limousine operators; 
(4)	Tattoo artists; 
(5)	Stables; 
(6)	Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; 
(7)	Scrap metal processors; 
(8)	Pawnbrokers; 
(9)	Food service establishment; 
(10)	Dealers in precious metals; 
(11)	Firearms dealers; 
(12)	Peddlers; 
(13)	Parking lots; 
(14)	Nursing and personal care homes; 
(15)	Newspaper vending boxes; 
(16)	Modeling agencies; 
(17)	Massage parlors; 
(18)	Landfills; 
(19)	Auto and motorcycle racing; 
(20)	Boarding houses; 
(21)	Businesses that provide appearance bonds; 
(22)	Boxing and wrestling promoters; 
(23)	Hotels and motels; 
(24)	Hypnotists; 
(25)	Handwriting analysts; 
(26)	Health clubs, gyms, and spas; and 
(27)	Fortunetellers. 
The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A schedule of regulatory fees imposed by the city shall be on file with the city clerk. 
(c)	An occupation tax shall be levied as the revenue-producing component of the fee structure. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-19. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)	Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by the number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the mayor and council: 

 
(c)	  (1) No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one (1) occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)	No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the city and who sell property inside the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-20. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)	Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-21. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-22. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-23. - Professions as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18. 
(a)	Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one (1) of the following: 
(1)	The occupation tax based on number of employees; 
(2)	A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. 
(b)	The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by March 31 of each year. The following is a list of such practitioners or professionals subject to these conditions: 
(1)	Lawyers; 
(2)	Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 34; 
(3)	Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 34; 
(4)	Chiropractors; 
(5)	Podiatrists; 
(6)	Dentists; 
(7)	Optometrists; 
(8)	Psychologists; 
(9)	Veterinarians; 
(10)	Landscape architects; 
(11)	Land surveyors; 
(12)	Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)	Public accountants; 
(14)	Embalmers; 
(15)	Funeral directors; 
(16)	Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(17)	Architects; 
(18)	Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-24. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-25. - Purpose of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-26. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)	Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee due. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city before July 1996 or before July of any succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten (10) percent penalty imposed. When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee and the business or occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city administrator and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the municipal court judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, either or both in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(b)	In addition to the above remedies, the city administrator may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(c)	Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the criminal sanctions imposed due to the delinquent payment by the payor of the occupation tax, shall not be enforceable against members of the legal profession. Timely payment of the occupation tax is required subject to the ten (10) percent penalty, however, no fines and/or imprisonment shall be levied against members of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95; Ord. No. 97-04, § 1, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 12-27. - Exemption for state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
The city shall not levy any occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. For the purposes of this article, a nonprofit organization is an organization which has received tax-exempt status within the meaning of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as such Code presently exists or is hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-28. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)	Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-29. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-30. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax and/or regulatory fees levied pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-31. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)	Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before April 1 of each year, and on April 1 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 12-26. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)	The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city administrator, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained such registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-32. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the municipal court judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-33. - Effect of entry of nulla bona on right of defaulting taxpayer to collect fees. 
When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the tax collector or tax commissioner against any person defaulting on a special tax, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-34. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Title 46, Chapter 3; 
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq.; 
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls); 
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356; 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; and 
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-35. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the mayor and council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-36. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of executions for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in full [force] until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-37. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city administrator and the police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court judge. It is hereby made the further duty of the city administrator, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants, to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-38. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by mayor and council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the mayor and council. All provisions heretofore relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-39. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the mayor and council shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-40. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The mayor and council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selective types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reason shall be set forth in the minutes of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-41. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-42. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to effect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 12-43. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Secs. 12-44, 12-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BILLIARD ROOMS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Billiard rooms generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-1 et seq.; municipal regulation of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-46. - Purpose of article. 
(a)	This article has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the city, to establish reasonable controls and ascertainable standards for the operation, regulation and control of billiard rooms, to give effect to existing land use, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining neighborhood and property values. 
(b)	This article shall not apply to those establishments maintaining no more than one (1) coin-operated pool table which has been previously licensed as a coin-operated device under Article IV, Coin-Operated Devices. 
(Code 1977, § 6-20; Ord. No. 90-12, 10-1-90) 
Sec. 12-47. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, definitions shall be the same as those utilized and contained within O.C.G.A. Section 48-8-1 except as may be contained and defined elsewhere in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 6-21) 
Sec. 12-48. - Compliance with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, control, own, frequent or enter any billiard room without having complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 6-22) 
Sec. 12-49. - Employees. 
(a)	No person shall be employed by any establishment holding any license under this article until such person has been issued a certificate of eligibility by the police department. 
(b)	All persons subject to the provisions of this article shall, within seventy-two (72) hours after the date of their first work in an establishment, report to the police department for fingerprinting. 
(c)	All persons reporting to the police department may be required to fill out a personal history statement for the purposes of an investigation into their eligibility for employment. 
(d)	The police department shall make a search relative to the police record of the person fingerprinted. The commission of a felony, and the conviction thereon shall act as a complete bar to employment in an establishment licensed under this article. The conviction for misdemeanors shall likewise act as a bar if they are of such numbers or of such types as to indicate that the individual has a bad reputation. 
(e)	The police department shall either issue a certificate or shall inform the license holder and the prospective employee why the certificate cannot be issued. 
(f)	The licensee may appeal an adverse finding to the municipal court. 
(g)	The police department may, from time to time, and as additional information becomes available, review issued certificates and may, as circumstances dictate, withdraw and/or suspend certificates for cause. Adverse findings may likewise be appealed to the municipal court. 
(h)	The licensee shall pay a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee to the police department before employment of any individual. Such fee shall be utilized to pay the costs of the police investigation. 
(Code 1977, § 6-23) 
Sec. 12-50. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful to sell, serve or allow the use of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises of any business licensed under this article unless such premises or establishment derives at least fifty-one (51) percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1977, § 6-24; Ord. No. 92-04, § 1, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 12-51. - Hours for operation of billiard rooms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. or to permit any person to remain in such billiard room between such prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. 
(Code 1977, § 6-25) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-9. 
Sec. 12-52. - Sanitary regulations; immoral conduct, betting, etc. 
(a)	All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to permit, participate in, and/or encourage any disturbance of the peace, or immoral conduct, or betting or wagering on any licensed premises. 
(Code 1977, § 6-26) 
State Law reference— Sanitation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-7; gambling on premises, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-12. 
Sec. 12-53. - Frequenting by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator, owner or employee of any business licensed under or operating under this article to allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter or remain within the confines of said business unless that person is either accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or shall have obtained a notarized authorization, upon forms to be supplied by the city police department, from either a parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1977, § 6-27) 
Sec. 12-54. - Ordering temporary closing. 
Temporary closings and/or suspensions of license for reasons of public safety may be ordered by the mayor, city recorder, or chief of police. Such order shall have a duration of not more than five (5) days and shall be issued for good cause only. 
(Code 1977, § 6-28) 
Secs. 12-55—12-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-71. - Required. 
No billiard room shall be opened or operated except under a license granted by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 6-35) 
Sec. 12-72. - Status of license; subject to laws, etc. 
All licenses granted under this division shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license and subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by the city charter, and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code, other ordinances, and state, county and federal laws and regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 6-36) 
Sec. 12-73. - Division subject to change. 
(a)	This division may be modified in whole or in part, and at any time, and all persons seeking or holding licenses are hereby notified that they may be affected by changes to this division that might in the future occur. 
(b)	All persons are expressly placed on notice that any license granted under this division shall be and is a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article, and that this article is subject to modification and that they are subject to any modification thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 6-37) 
Sec. 12-74. - Application form, content. 
All persons desiring to obtain a license under this division shall make a written application to the city for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the governing body. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the proposed location of the business, the nature and character of the business to be carried on, proof of compliance with state license laws, proof of ownership of county license, and such other information as may be required by the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 6-38) 
Sec. 12-75. - Investigation of application, report. 
All applications required under this division shall be investigated by the police department. The police department shall file its report with the police committee. 
(Code 1977, § 6-39) 
Sec. 12-76. - Disqualifying circumstances—General. 
No license shall be granted under this division where the application, investigation by the police department, or the evidence on a hearing shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)	That the applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which the application is made. 
(2)	That the applicant has had a license for a similar establishment suspended or revoked within the five-year period next preceding the date of application unless such applicant can show that such suspension was lifted or unless such revocation was lifted and the license later restored. 
(3)	That the applicant has been convicted of more than one (1) misdemeanor within the five-year period next preceding the date of application. Minor traffic violations shall not be considered in the determination of the aforementioned misdemeanors. A conviction of a misdemeanor shall include the adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or the forfeiture of a bond of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. Violations of city ordinances shall be considered misdemeanors for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 6-40; Ord. No. 92-04, § 2, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 12-77. - Same—Felony conviction; dishonorable military discharge. 
No license shall be issued under this division to any person who shall have been convicted of any felony, nor to any person who shall have received a dishonorable discharge from the armed forces of the United States. 
(Code 1977, § 6-41) 
Sec. 12-78. - Same—Denial for false information in application. 
Any material omission, or any untrue statement contained in an original or renewal application for a license under this division shall furnish grounds for denial thereof or sufficient grounds for revocation thereof as the case may be. 
(Code 1977, § 6-42) 
Sec. 12-79. - Issuance of license limited to designated areas. 
No license shall be issued to any person for the operation of a business except in properly zoned areas. 
(Code 1977, § 6-43) 
Sec. 12-80. - Fee—Setting annually. 
The annual license fee for licenses issued under this division shall be set by the governing body during the month of December of each year. Such fee shall be applied during the following year. Should the governing body not set a rate for any year then the fee to be charged shall continue at the rate set for the preceding year. 
(Code 1977, § 6-44) 
Sec. 12-81. - Same—Payment. 
All annual license fees under this division shall be paid on or before February 15th of each year. Any new license granted hereunder shall require the full fee. 
(Code 1977, § 6-45; Ord. No. 92-04, § 3, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 12-82. - Same—No refund in event of revocation. 
In the event of revocation, no refund of any kind, or of any part of any license fee issued under this division shall be made. 
(Code 1977, § 6-46) 
Sec. 12-83. - Investigation, report and approval prerequisite to issuance. 
All applications for a license under this division shall be investigated by the police department, shall be reported to the police committee, and favorably acted upon by the governing body before the city administrator shall be authorized to issue any license under this division. 
(Code 1977, § 6-47) 
Sec. 12-84. - Time for obtaining license after approval. 
All licenses required by this division must be obtained and all fees paid within thirty (30) days of approval of application by the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 6-48) 
Sec. 12-85. - Transfer of license. 
No license granted under this division shall be transferred. 
(Code 1977, § 6-49) 
Sec. 12-86. - Annual renewal. 
(a)	All businesses operating under this division shall be required to renew their licenses annually, by February 15th of each year, upon the forms prescribed by the governing body. 
(b)	Prior to renewal, all persons holding licenses and requesting renewal thereof shall obtain the required county license and shall display such county license to the city administrator at the time the application for renewal is submitted. 
(Code 1977, § 6-50; Ord. No. 92-04, § 4, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 12-87. - Suspension and revocation—Authorized. 
All licenses granted under this division are subject to revocation and/or suspension by either the governing body or by the municipal court. 
(Code 1977, § 6-51) 
Sec. 12-88. - Same—Conditions; grounds. 
(a)	No license issued by the city under this division shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon five (5) days' written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(b)	"Due cause" for the suspension or for the revocation of any license issued under this division shall consist of the violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business, or the violation of any state or federal law, or the violation of any city ordinance, other than traffic ordinances, or the falsification, by either material omission or untrue statement, of any application, or information in obtaining any license or the renewal thereof. 
(c)	The hearing for determination of grounds for suspension or revocation shall be held by the municipal court with appeal therefrom to the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 6-52) 
Sec. 12-89. - Same—Automatic revocation upon revocation of county license. 
Whenever the county shall revoke any county license the comparable city license is thereby revoked. It shall be necessary to have all required county licenses in order to hold a valid city license. 
(Code 1977, § 6-53) 
Secs. 12-90—12-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COIN-OPERATED DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arcade room shall mean any establishment where more than three (3) coin-operated amusement machines are placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
Arcade room proprietor shall mean any proprietor of an arcade room. As used herein, the terms "proprietor" and "arcade room proprietor" shall be synonymous unless specifically provided otherwise. 
Coin-operated amusement machine shall mean any machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, for the purpose of receiving the temporary services of such machine for recreation or a game of skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term includes coin-operated electronic games, pinball machines, and other similar devices. The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated recreation features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical devices or kiddie rides. As used herein the terms "machine" and "coin-operated amusement machine" shall be synonymous unless specifically provided otherwise. 
Distributor shall mean any person who sets up for operation by another and leases or rents for the purpose of operation by another, any machine as herein regulated, whether such leasing or renting be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise. 
Proprietor shall mean any person who, as the owner or lessee, has under his control any establishment, place or premises in or at which a coin-operated amusement machine is placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-54, 3-9-82) 
Secs. 12-107—12-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-121. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of a distributor or proprietor of coin-operated amusement machines without first having obtained the proper license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-55, 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-122. - Application. 
(a)	Application for license under this division shall be filed in writing with the city administrator, on a form to be provided by the city, and shall specify: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses. 
(2)	Proprietors shall list the address of the premises where the licensed machine or machines are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place. 
(3)	Proprietors shall list the number of machines to be maintained on the premises. 
(4)	Proprietors shall list the name and address of the owner and/or distributor of the machine or machines, if other than the proprietor. 
(5)	Distributors shall list the names and addresses of all proprietors within the city on whose premises the distributor has installed, placed or assigned such machines and shall list the total number of machines at each location. 
(6)	Whether or not the person having management of or supervision over the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense, and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(7)	The information contained within this application shall not be released to the general public without the consent of the licensee. 
(b)	The proper license fee shall accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-59, 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-02, adopted January 4, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former § 12-123 in its entirety. Former § 12-123 pertained to fees, and derived from Ord. No. 82-2, adopted March 9, 1982; and Ord. No. 94-05, adopted December 5, 1994. 
Sec. 12-124. - Character qualifications. 
No license shall be issued under this division to or renewed for any person who has or employs a person who has, within five (5) years of issuance or renewal, been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, any felony involving any federal or state offense or any federal or state misdemeanor involving drug-related offenses or offenses involving moral turpitude. The licensee will submit the identity of all owners and employees to the city on a continuing basis as changes occur. This information shall be forwarded to the police department for the purpose of allowing a complete check in order that these character qualifications be fulfilled, prior to the issuance or renewal of any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-60, 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-125. - Increasing number of devices. 
In case a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this division desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase the number of machines to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, so that he then has three (3) or more machines, he shall surrender his license to the city administrator who shall issue a new arcade room proprietor license upon payment of the proper license fee therefor with any applicable credit for the previously paid license fee. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-61, 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-126. - Assignment, transfer. 
The license required by this division shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and in the case of a proprietor shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-59, 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-127. - Display; identification of machine. 
The license issued under this division shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. In addition, each machine shall have placed upon it by the licensee a sticker showing the license number of its distributor and/or proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-59, 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-128. - Revocation. 
In the event that it comes to the attention of the governing body that the amusement machine in question has created a nuisance to the surrounding community or has violated any provision of this article, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)	The chief of police shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the machine or machines in question are alleged to be a nuisance or alleged to violate any provision of this article. The chief of police will then notify the proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the governing body on this matter. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(2)	At the time of the hearing, any resident, the distributor, the proprietor and the chief of police may be heard. After this hearing the governing body shall issue a "notice of decision" which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this article. 
(3)	The decision of the governing body shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decision and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)	The decision of the governing body shall be final but may be appealed to the appropriate court within thirty (30) days. 
(5)	The decision of the governing body shall be binding upon the proprietor and distributor of the machine under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-62, 3-9-82) 
Secs. 12-129—12-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL RULES 

Sec. 12-141. - Conformance to division. 
All businesses licensed under this article shall be subject to the provisions of this division. Violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of a license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-63, 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-142. - Inspection. 
The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine or machines are operated or set up for operation and to inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-63(b), 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-143. - Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. 
(a)	All machines coming under this article shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. However, no machine shall be placed within five (5) feet of any public entrance or exit and no proprietor, except arcade room proprietors may keep or maintain a machine between any public entrance or exit and any cash register. 
(b)	Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-63(a), 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-144. - Attendant required. 
It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. The attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Such attendant shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-63(c), 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-145. - Refunds and adjustments. 
Refunds and adjustments to all customers shall be the responsibility of the proprietor of the machine in question. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-63(d), 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-146. - Loitering. 
(a)	As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated under this article or for any person licensed to operate an arcade room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
(1)	Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
(2)	Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
(3)	Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(4)	Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-63(e), 3-9-82) 
Sec. 12-147. - Alcoholic beverages. 
No proprietor shall allow alcoholic beverages to be brought onto their premises by any person. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, § 6-63(f), 3-9-82) 
Secs. 12-148—12-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNBROKERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; authority to regulate pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

Sec. 12-166. - License. 
(a)	No person shall conduct business as a pawnbroker, or maintain an establishment for the purposes of conducting business as a pawnbroker, until a business license has been obtained from the city administrator. Such license application shall be made to the city administrator and license issued only upon approval by the governing body. 
(b)	No action on any application for pawnbroker's license shall be taken until the chief of police has reviewed and investigated such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the governing body for its consideration, approval, or denial. 
(c)	No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person or to any pawnbroker who employs anyone who has been convicted of any crime involving as an element thereof the theft of property. 
(d)	The annual regulatory fee for each pawnbroker doing business within the city or for each individual establishment maintained for the purpose of doing business as a pawnbroker within the city shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A schedule of regulatory fees imposed by the city shall be on file with the city clerk. 
(e)	Any person violating any subsection of this section shall be subject to revocation of his license to do business. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, §§ 6-64—6-67, 6-72; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 3-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-167. - Hours of operation. 
A pawnbroker shall not conduct business in the city except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown, whichever occurs first, Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 6-67, 2-6-84) 
Sec. 12-168. - Records. 
(a)	Each pawnbroker licensed under this article shall furnish to the chief of police each week a list of every item pledged with him or sold to him during the previous week. Such list may be a copy of the information required to be kept by O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 or any other list maintained containing the same information as follows: 
(1)	The date of transaction. 
(2)	The name of the person conducting the transaction. 
(3)	The name, age and address of the customer, a description of the general appearance of the customer and a distinctive number from the customer's driver's license. In the event the customer has no valid driver's license, the pawnbroker shall make and retain a photograph of such customer. 
(4)	An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial, model or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon. 
(5)	The number of the receipt or pawn ticket. 
(6)	The price paid or the amount loaned. 
(7)	The number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan if payment is made by check. 
(8)	The maturity date of the transaction. 
(9)	The signature of the customer. 
(b)	Entries shall appear in chronological order in ink. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business, or at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 6-68, 2-6-84) 
State Law reference— Records, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 et seq. 
Sec. 12-169. - Thumbprints. 
Any pawnbroker who shall receive as a pledge or purchase any item, good or ware valued in excess of ten dollars ($10.00) or any revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle or any other firearm shall be required to take a thumbprint of such person pledging or selling any of the above items. Such thumbprints must be kept by the pawnbroker as part of the records required by the state and for the period of time required therein. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 6-69, 2-6-84) 
Sec. 12-170. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 6-70, 2-6-84) 
State Law reference— Records, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 et seq. 
Sec. 12-171. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe the article was stolen, or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. No pawnbroker shall accept any item, good or ware upon which a manufacturer's identity or serial number has been removed, obliterated, or in any way caused to become unreadable. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 6-71, 2-6-84) 
Sec. 12-172. - Certain purchased articles to be held thirty days. 
Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who purchases goods, other than those purchased through wholesalers or on order in the normal course of business, taking full title thereto (the word "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property) shall hold such goods purchased for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 6-72, 2-6-84) 
Secs. 12-173—12-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE DETECTIVES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Commercial guard or security dogs, § 5-60. 
State Law reference— Georgia Private Detective Business and Private Security Agencies Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1 et seq.; local ordinances authorized, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-14(c). 

Sec. 12-191. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the words "private detectives" or "private detective agencies" are defined as those following the business or vocation pursued by all persons or agencies making investigations for others when the investigations involve the conduct, life or affairs of the persons investigated. These terms shall not include lawyers and accountants in the course of their practice or incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 89-03, § 6-74, 2-6-89) 
Sec. 12-192. - Annual licensing. 
(a)	Any person wishing to engage in the business of private detective or private detective agency shall make the initial application, pay the license fee and be granted an initial license prior to beginning any detective work in the city. Initial licenses shall expire on December thirty-first of the year in which they are granted. Thereafter the person shall make application for continuance of the business in the city annually on or before January first for license for the coming year. The procedure on the application shall be followed as was followed on the original application. A separate license must be obtained for each person engaged in activities described herein even though that person is an employee of another person duly licensed under this section. 
(b)	Any person who shall desire to engage in the business of a private detective or detective agency shall first make application to the chief of police and the application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name of the applicant, his age and present address. 
(2)	The places the applicant has resided in the past ten (10) years. 
(3)	The places the applicant has been employed for the past ten (10) years. 
(4)	The marital status of the applicant. 
(5)	Information concerning the experience the applicant has had in detective work. 
(6)	Information concerning the applicant's criminal record, if any. 
(7)	The names and addresses of two (2) residents of the state for character purposes. 
(8)	The names and addresses of two (2) credit references. 
(9)	Any other information the chief of police deems pertinent. 
The application shall be accompanied by a photograph not more than twelve (12) months old of the applicant. 
The application shall be made under oath and the giving of false information shall result in the revocation of any license issued in reliance thereon. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of the chief of police to accept each application presented to him as set out above. The chief shall then investigate the character, integrity and competence of the applicant. The chief shall then submit a written report to the city administrator together with recommendations for the issuance or denial of the license. The city administrator shall report to the governing body at the next regular meeting. The governing body shall determine the merits of the matter and either direct the issuance of the license or deny the same. 
(d)	No person shall be granted a license as a private detective unless that person has attained twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(e)	The annual regulatory fee for each person shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-03, §§ 6-75—6-80, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 94-05, § 8, 12-5-94) 
State Law reference— State license as prerequisite, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-14.1. 
Sec. 12-193. - Police supervision. 
All private detectives shall be subject to supervision and direction by police officers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-03, § 6-81, 2-6-89) 
Sec. 12-194. - Regulations and prohibited activities. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to allow any person licensed hereunder to violate the laws of the United States, the state, or the city, nor shall any person licensed hereunder violate the civil or constitutional rights of any person nor shall any person licensed under this article use the license, credentials, or position to collect money or obtain property from any person. Should the city administrator receive a complaint from any person that a licensee has violated any provision of this section, he shall within thirty (30) days of receiving the complaint set up a hearing before the governing body and give the person against whom the complaint was made fifteen (15) days' notice of the hearing. At the hearing the mayor or, in his absence, the mayor pro tem shall preside. Both the complaining party and the person against whom the complaint is made shall be entitled to counsel of their choice; to subpoena and call witnesses; and be heard on the merits. Witnesses shall testify under oath and be subject to penalty for perjury if false testimony is given. The purpose of the hearing shall be to determine the fitness of the person against whom the complaint is made to continue to operate as a private detective in the city. After hearing evidence from both sides, the governing body shall vote "yes" or "no," to continue the license. If a majority of the governing body present and voting, vote "no," the license shall be thereupon revoked. No person whose license has been revoked shall be allowed to reapply for a license within twelve (12) months of the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 89-03, § 6-82, 2-6-89) 
Secs. 12-195—12-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SOLID WASTE HANDLERS 

Sec. 12-211. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the definition of solid waste shall be the same as defined within Article V of Chapter 24. 
(Ord. No. 93-01, 1-4-93) 
Sec. 12-212. - License required. 
No person shall conduct business as a solid waste handler within the city without first obtaining a business license from the city administrator in the manner specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-01, 1-4-93) 
Sec. 12-213. - Fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each solid waste handler doing business within the city shall be set from time to time as deemed appropriate by the governing body. Current schedules of such license fees shall be kept on file in the city administrator's office. 
(Ord. No. 93-01, 1-4-93) 
Sec. 12-214. - Application. 
All persons desiring to obtain a license under this article shall submit an initial written application, and a renewal application annually thereafter, to the city for such privilege upon forms to be approved by the governing body. Such applications shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location or proposed location of the business, the service area of the business, proof of compliance with state license laws and with city ordinances (particularly with Article V of Chapter 24 of the city code), proof of ownership of county license, if required, and such other information as may be required by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 93-01, 1-4-93) 
Sec. 12-215. - Letters of assurance required. 
(a)	In addition to the information required of an applicant for a solid waste handler's license, each initial and renewal application must also include a letter of solid waste disposal assurance from a state-permitted solid waste disposal facility. The letter must be on the letterhead of the entity owning the disposal facility and must contain the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of the solid waste disposal facility to be utilized by the applicant. 
(2)	Name, address and telephone number of the entity to whom the state permit is issued. 
(3)	Name, title and telephone number of the authorized individual or company official signing the assurance letter on behalf of the disposal facility. 
(4)	Estimated life of permitted capacity remaining at current and projected rates of waste disposal in tons or cubic yards. 
(5)	A statement that sufficient disposal capacity exists to accommodate the solid waste handling applicant over the expected remaining life of the disposal facility based on the remaining capacity and the amount of waste received at the disposal facility. 
(6)	A statement that appropriate arrangements are in place such that the disposal facility will reserve a portion of its capacity on behalf of the solid waste handler license applicant. 
(b)	In the event the proposed disposal facility has a remaining life of less than ten (10) years, the license application must include additional letters of solid waste disposal assurance containing the above-described information such that a total of ten (10) years of disposal assurance is provided. 
(Ord. No. 93-01, 1-4-93) 
Sec. 12-216. - Compliance with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, control, manage or own any business which handles solid waste within the city without having complied with the provisions of this article. Noncompliance shall subject such a violator to the revocation of any business license which may have been issued pursuant to this article, and to a fine and/or imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 93-01, 1-4-93) 
Secs. 12-217—12-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BAIL BONDSMEN[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 93-03, adopted Feb. 1, 1993, added provisions designated as Ch. 2, Art. VII, §§ 12-211—12-216. To avoid duplicative section numbering, such provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 2, Art. VIII, §§ 12-221—12-228 at the discretion of the editor. Subsequently, Ord. No. 93-04, §§ 1—4, adopted June 7, 1993, set out provisions intended to amend Ch. 2, Art. VIII, §§ 12-212 and 12-214; these provisions were applied to §§ 12-222 and 12-224 due to the renumbering indicated above. 

Sec. 12-221. - Annual licensing. 
(a)	Any person wishing to engage in the business of a bail bondsman must first obtain a county license, complete the initial application, submit any required paperwork or documentation, pay the license fee, and then be approved for the initial license by the mayor and council prior to conducting business or operating within the city. Initial licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they are granted. 
(b)	All licensees operating under this article shall be required to renew their licenses annually during the month of January of each year, following the same procedure for the renewal application as was required for the original application. Prior to renewal, all license holders shall obtain the required county license and shall display such county license to the city administrator at the time the application for renewal is submitted. 
(c)	The annual license fee for licenses issued under this article shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council as they deem appropriate, and a schedule of such fees shall be kept current and maintained on file in the city administrator's office. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, 2-1-93) 
Sec. 12-222. - Application. 
(a)	Application under this article shall be completed in writing, verified, and filed with the city administrator, on a form to be provided by the city, and shall contain the following: 
(1)	Name and home address of the applicant. 
(2)	If the business is to be owned or operated by a corporation, partnership, or association, the names and home addresses of the owners, partners, shareholders, officers and directors. 
(3)	The social security numbers, driver's license numbers, and dates of birth of the applicant and all owners, partners, shareholders, officers and directors. 
(4)	Address and telephone number of the premises where the proposed business is to be located. 
(b)	The following documents must be attached as exhibits to the application: 
(1)	Certified documentation evidencing the county sheriff's approval of the applicant to conduct business as a bail bondsman, or a certified copy of the county license to conduct business as a bail bondsman. 
(2)	The surety bond, or proof of an approved and accepted alternative form of security as a substitution thereof, as required under section 12-224. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 93-04, § 1, 6-7-93) 
Sec. 12-223. - Investigation of applicant, owner, etc. 
All applicants, owners, partners, shareholders, officers and directors applying for a license under this article shall be investigated by the chief of police within ten (10) business days following the applicant's submission of the application to the city administrator. The chief of police will then forward the application along with his recommendation to the mayor and council for consideration and action at their next regularly-scheduled public meeting. No license shall be granted prior to approval by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, 2-1-93) 
Sec. 12-224. - Surety required. 
(a)	Applicants for a license under this article shall file a surety bond with the city administrator binding the surety to the city in an amount up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) issued by a surety company that is acceptable to and approved by the city administrator. No license shall be granted under this article prior to submission of the surety bond and approval of the surety company by the city administrator. 
(b)	A liability insurance policy or a letter of credit payable to the city in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), which has been issued by an insurance company or a financial institution, respectively, authorized to do business in the state and approved by the city administrator, may be permitted by the mayor and council in their discretion in lieu of the surety bond herein required. Alternatively, real property with a fair market value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), free and clear of any liens, and remaining lien-free throughout the existence of the business, may be posted to the city as security, if acceptable by the mayor and council in their discretion, in lieu of the surety bond, liability insurance policy, or letter of credit. 
(c)	In addition, the city shall have the right to demand additional surety depending on the circumstances and in the discretion of the city administrator and/or the municipal court judge. The surety amount may also be raised from time to time, as the city administrator and/or the municipal court judge deem appropriate, based upon the number and amount of outstanding bonds issued by any particular business licensed hereunder. 
(d)	Any security submitted pursuant to this section, whether in the form of surety bonds, insurance policies, letters of credit, or real property, shall be held by the city for a minimum period of twelve (12) months after the business is terminated. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, 2-1-93; Ord. No. 93-04, §§ 2—4, 6-7-93) 
Sec. 12-225. - Suspension and revocation; authorized. 
All licenses granted under this article are subject to revocation and/or suspension by either the mayor and council or by the municipal court, subject to constitutional due process. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, 2-1-93) 
Sec. 12-226. - Transfer of license. 
No license granted under this article shall be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, 2-1-93) 
Sec. 12-227. - Automatic revocation upon revocation of county license. 
Whenever the county shall revoke any county bondsman license the city bondsman license is thereby revoked. It shall be necessary to have all required county licenses in order to hold a valid city license. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, 2-1-93) 
Sec. 12-228. - Penalty for noncompliance with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, control or own any bail bondsman business without having complied with the provisions of this article. Any noncompliance shall subject the license holder to revocation of the business license, and/or fines and/or imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 93-03, 2-1-93) 
Secs. 12-229, 12-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 12-231. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases when used herein shall be construed as follows: 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to form indelible marks or figures or by the production of scars; provided, however, that the word "tattoo" shall not mean a tattoo placed upon the skin by a physician for medical identification purposes. 
Tattoo artist means any person who actually performs the work of tattooing. 
Tattoo establishment means any room or place where tattooing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. 
Tattoo operator means any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 12-232. - License required. 
No person shall operate a tattoo establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist unless and until the person has first secured a license to do so from the city. Each application for a license to engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall include payment of an investigative fee and an annual license fee in amounts to be determined by the governing body from time to time in a separate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 12-233. - Application. 
Any person desiring to operate a tattoo establishment or desiring to operate as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall make application for a permit to the police department, on forms supplied by that department. The minimum age of each applicant shall be eighteen (18) years of age. Fingerprints of all applicants shall be taken by the bureau. Applicants for permits shall also furnish to the detective bureau two (2) photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size two and one-half (2½) inches by two and three-fourths (2¾) inches. Applicants for permits shall present to the bureau a medical certificate from a medical doctor certifying that the person is sound physically, mentally, has good eyesight and is not infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 12-234. - License issued in name of applicant; nontransferable. 
All licenses granted shall be issued in the name of the individual person applying therefor, shall contain the location of the tattoo establishment where the applicant shall operate and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 12-235. - Tattooing certain persons prohibited. 
No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo any person who is a minor, any person who is under either the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants, or depressants or any person of unsound mind. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 12-236. - Grounds for revocation of license. 
Any person who shall conduct a tattoo establishment or engage in the business as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist without first securing a license therefor or who shall knowingly violate any of the sections of this article shall subject the license to revocation upon appropriate notice of hearing. An artist's or operator's license shall be subject to revocation upon proof that the holder of the permit has become infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 12-237. - Location restricted. 
No permit shall issue for the operation of a tattoo establishment or to any person engaged as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist in any area which is zoned for residential use by the zoning ordinance of the city as it may now or hereafter exist. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 12-238. - License not in lieu of occupation tax certificate. 
The licenses issued hereunder shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any occupation tax certificate issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 12-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 12-240. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Palmetto Excise Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-241. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public finance. Georgia law authorizes counties and municipalities to impose an excise tax on the sale or use of energy but the imposition of the excise tax on the sale or use of energy in the law is contingent upon the enactment of an ordinance of the municipality in question. In order for the municipality to properly impose such excise tax the municipality must follow all of the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 13, Article 6, one (1) provision of which is the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-242. - Definitions. 
Dealer shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Energy shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Local sales and use tax shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
Purchaser shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-243. - Energy excise tax imposed. 
(a)	In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 38, Chapter 13, Article 6, there is imposed within the territorial limits of the City of Palmetto, an excise tax on the sale or use of energy when such sale or use would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. Title 38, Chapter 8, Article 1, but for the exemption found in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(b)	The sales or use of energy when such sale or use would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, Article 1, but for the exemption found in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2 includes, but is not limited to, the items listed in subsection (e) of the same Code section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-244. - Energy excise tax rate and phase-in. 
(a)	The rate of the excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be phased in over a four-year period as directed by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112(a)(3) and 48-13-112(b) and as set forth below: 
(1)	For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the city that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)	For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the city that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)	For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to seventy-five (75) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the city that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)	On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the city that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(b)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the territorial limits of the city, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (3) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in subsection (a)(4) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that subsection (a)(4). 
(c)	Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of the city shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the city, but in no event more than two (2) percent. 
(d)	In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the city decreases from two (2) percent to one (1) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(e)	In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the city increases from one (1) percent to two (2) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-245. - Energy excise tax imposition, remittance and recovery. 
(a)	The excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be imposed at the time and be recoverable as governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(b)	The excise tax shall be a debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts as governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(c)	The dealer collecting the excise tax shall remit the excise tax to the city if the city is the governing authority imposing the excise tax as governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(d)	Every dealer subject to an excise tax under this article shall be liable for the excise tax at an applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of the excise taxes collected from the purchasers, whichever is greater as governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-246. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)	The governing authority of the city, or the collecting officer appointed under this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the city and to ascertain whether such purchasers have completed a uniform exemption certificate provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser under the exemption found in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-32.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)	An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue. The energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed under this article if a purchaser has failed to submit the uniform exemption certificate provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue to such energy provider. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-247. - Commencement of collections and due date. 
(a)	The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013. 
(b)	The excise tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time that sales and use tax on the sale and use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)	The excise tax shall be due and payable in the same manner as would otherwise be required under O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, Article 1. 
(d)	All sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month shall be due and payable to the City of Palmetto monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-248. - Expenditure of proceeds. 
The proceeds of the excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall not be subject to any use or expenditure requirements provided for under any of the local sales and use taxes but shall be authorized to be expended in the same manner as otherwise would have been required under such local sales and use taxes or may be expended for any lawful purpose as governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c). Any proceeds received by the city pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-249. - Termination of municipal excise tax. 
(a)	If the city has levied and collected an excise tax within the corporate limits of municipality under this article because the county in which the city is located has refused or failed to enter into an intergovernmental agreement with each municipality wishing to participate in such excise tax as allowed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-115(a)(1) and then the county determines to commence proceedings for the imposition of the excise tax as allowed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-115(b)(2), then the excise tax levied and collected by the municipality shall cease to the extent as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-115(b)(2). 
(b)	If the county has commenced proceedings for the imposition of the excise tax as allowed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-115(b)(2) and the excise tax levied and collected by the municipality has terminated and the municipality has chosen to participate in the county excise tax, then this article shall remain effective for the purposes of O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 13, Article 6, and particularly for the rates required by the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-250. - Administrative provisions and audit. 
(a)	The city governing authority shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)	The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. 
(c)	The collecting officer, or designee, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of and locations within the city of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax to the energy dealer under this article. 
(d)	As part by the audit report required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 2-4-2013) 
Secs. 12-251—12-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS 

Sec. 12-260. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases when used herein shall be construed as follows: 
Dealer in precious metals or gems means: 
(1)	Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
(2)	A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Nonpermanent location means any location designed to be used to conduct the aforementioned business, in any movable vehicle, and temporary and movable structure, including, but not limited to, vans, mobile homes, trailers, hotels and motels, lodges, or any similar nonpermanent structure designed by applicant to be used to conduct said business for a limited or specific time. Applications for businesses under this article at such locations shall not be accepted. 
Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Permanent location means a business domiciled within a properly constructed building which must be located within a properly zoned area, according to the city's zoning ordinance. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-261. - Registration required; application contents; application approval fees. 
(a)	No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals or gems within the municipal limits of the City of Palmetto without first obtaining from the city an occupation tax certificate and registering with the city to operate as a dealer in precious metals or gems. 
(b)	The application for registration to operate a business as a dealer in precious metals or gems shall be promulgated by the city administrator. 
(c)	The application for said registration shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the applicant. The application shall contain, but not be limited to: 
(1)	The precise location from which the proposes business is to operate; 
(2)	The full name, address, phone number, date of birth and Social Security number of the applicant and any other persons having an ownership interest in the proposed business; 
(3)	The names, addresses, and ages of all officers of any publicly held corporation holding an interest in the proposed business and their titles; 
(4)	The full name, address, phone number, date of birth and Social Security number of all employees to be employed in the proposed business; 
(5)	Photographs, fingerprints and any other information deemed necessary for a background investigation by the Police Department of the City of Palmetto; and 
(6)	Any such other information as deemed necessary by the mayor and council for the City of Palmetto or the city administrator. 
(d)	All applications for registration under this article shall be accompanied by the tendering of a regulatory fee as set out in a schedule of fees adopted by the mayor and council. Said regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-262. - Processing of application. 
Review of an application to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems shall be conducted by the city administrator. The Police Chief for the City of Palmetto shall determine whether the applicant or any of their employees has ever been convicted of any felony, any crime involving larceny, burglary or theft of any description, as defined in the Official Code of Georgia, or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-263. - Method of maintaining records. 
(a)	Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods containing precious metals or gems, the following information: 
(1)	The date and time of the purchase transaction; 
(2)	The name of the person making the purchase from the seller; 
(3)	The name, age and address of the seller of the item(s) purchases and the distinctive number from such seller's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the seller; 
(4)	A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial numbers, model numbers or other numbers, and any identifying marks inscribed thereon; 
(5)	The price paid for the goods purchased; 
(6)	The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if the payment is made by check; and 
(5)	The signature of the seller. 
(b)	The permanent record book required herein shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for a period of four (4) years. Entries shall appear in chronological order in ink. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliteration, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book and all precious metals or gems and goods containing precious metals or gems shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer at all times. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-264. - Required daily written report. 
Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall make a daily report in writing to the Police Department of the City of Palmetto of all precious metals or gems or goods containing precious metals or gems purchased during the twenty-four (24) hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. The reports shall be on forms or on duplicate invoices as may be prescribed or approved the police department. The reports shall be legible and mailed or delivered to the police department prior to 10:00 a.m. on the day following the date of the report. In addition to any other information required by the police department, the reports shall include the name and address of the registered dealer, the date of transaction, a description and amount of the precious metals or gems or goods containing precious metals or gems purchased, and the name and address of the person from whom purchased. The police department may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this section to require the proper enforcement thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-265. - Holding period. 
Any dealer who acquires used valuables in the course of business shall hold these items for at least ten (10) days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment, grinding down, melting, or otherwise changing the original appearance of the item. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed as to prevent any dealer from storing such items off the business premises, or placing such items in the hands of any bank or security company for the purpose of safekeeping. However, any dealer storing such items off the premises shall produce such items for inspection within twelve (12) hours following the demand of any officer of the police department. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-266. - Hours of operation. 
The hours within which dealers in precious metals or gems may keep open their place of business shall be from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-267. - Unlawful activities. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems or any agent or employee of a dealer in precious metals or gems who makes purchases of precious metals or gems or goods containing precious metals or gems to: 
(1)	Make any false statement in the registration provided for by this article; 
(2)	Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record book as required by section 12-263 of this article; 
(3)	Make any false entries therein; 
(4)	Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; 
(5)	Fail to submit daily reports as required by section 12-264 of this article; 
(6)	Refuse to allow a duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent book or any precious metals or goods containing precious metals in his or her possession; 
(7)	Sell, exchange, or remove from the legal possession of the buyer, or to alter the form of, any precious metals or gems or goods containing precious metals or gems purchased by remounting, melting, cutting up, or otherwise altering the original form until at least seven (7) calendar days have elapsed from the time of purchase or acquisition; or 
(8)	Purchase any precious metals or gems from any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals or gems without first registering as required by this article. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals or gems. 
(d)	If a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that precious metals or gems have been stolen, he or she may give notice in writing to the dealer to retain the precious metals or gems for an additional fifteen (15) days; and it shall be unlawful for the dealer to dispose of the property unless the notice is revoked in writing within the fifteen-day period. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-268. - Suspension or revocation of registration. 
Any registration issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked upon the following grounds: 
(1)	Misrepresentation of any information in the original or renewal application for any registration authorized by this article; 
(2)	The conviction of the registered dealer for a felony, the violation of any criminal law involving larceny, burglary or theft of any description as defined in the Official Code of Georgia, or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; and 
(3)	The conviction of the registered dealer for a violation of any part of section 12-267(a) of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Sec. 12-269. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)	No registration which has been issued to any person pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except upon one (1) or more of the grounds stated in section 12-268 and until after the registered dealer has been notified by the city administrator. 
(b)	Where it is reported to the city administrator that a registered dealer is engaged in unlawful activities, a preliminary investigation shall be conducted by the city administrator in order to attempt to determine whether there is a basis for the reports. If the city administrator's preliminary investigation reveals that there may be a basis for revocation and suspension of the registration, the registered dealer shall be notified to appear before the city administrator and show cause on a date certain why his or her registration should not be revoked or suspended. The registered dealer may appear in person at the hearing or be represented by counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city administrator, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter an order making a finding of fact and then: 
(1)	Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; 
(2)	Issue a warning to the registered dealer; 
(3)	Suspend the registration and probate suspension; 
(4)	Revoke the registration and probate revocation; 
(5)	Suspend the registration; or 
(6)	Revoke the registration. 
(c)	Within five (5) days from the date of the order from the city administrator, the registered dealer may appeal the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the mayor and council. The city administrator shall schedule a hearing before the mayor and council and notify the registered dealer of the time and date of the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the mayor and council shall enter an order which contains therein a finding of fact and a decision to: 
(1)	Find in favor of the registered dealer; 
(2)	Issue a warning to registered dealer; 
(3)	Suspend the registration and probate suspension; 
(4)	Revoke the registration and probate revocation; 
(5)	Suspend the registration; 
(6)	Revoke the registration; and/or 
(7)	Take any other appropriate action regarding the registered dealer. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-2-2015 ) 
Chapter 13 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, repealed former Ch. 13, §§ 13-1—13-105, and enacted a new Ch. 13 as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977, § 7-1255. 
Charter reference— Power to regulate businesses, § 27.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Business license taxes and fees, § 12-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charge, either directly or indirectly, refers to a salary, commission, gratuity or other remuneration as paid or made available to a massage therapist administering massages as a primary or incidental activity resulting from such payment a charge, fee, dues or other payment for the purpose of receiving any service or use of an establishment which provides for the payor the opportunity to obtain a massage. 
Genitals means the external sexual organs. 
Health certificate means a certificate from a regular practicing medical doctor showing that the person named therein has been examined and is free from any infectious or communicable disease. 
Massage means the act or art of treating the human body or any part thereof by rubbing, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, application of friction or percussion or like ministrations to stimulate circulation or increase suppleness for a charge, direct or indirect. 
Massage establishment means any building, room, place or establishment where massages are practiced upon the human body for a charge, either directly or indirectly, by a person, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, whether primary or an incidental activity of the establishment in which the massage is performed. 
Massage establishment license means that document issued by the city to an establishment where massages are furnished. 
Massage therapist means a person who administers massages. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-2. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or licensed vocational or practical nurse acting at the direction of a doctor; nor a duly licensed establishment wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor and which operate only under the licensed party's direction; nor shall it apply to athletic trainers of a bona fide athletic team when the trainers are massaging members of the team, nor to a duly licensed hospital or medical clinic. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-3. - Conflict with other provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall in no way affect nor limit the provisions and requirements of the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-4. - Violations. 
The operation of any business, administration of any massage, use of any license issued pursuant to this chapter contrary to any provision of this chapter or the failure to comply with any provision of this chapter: 
(1)	Shall, if continued, be deemed and considered a nuisance; 
(2)	Shall be subject to any other provision for suspension, revocation or denial as provided herein and any other civil or criminal action or penalty or proceeding provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-5. - Inspections. 
The city shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter in any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city shall also have authority to direct that the health officer or official of the city shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the sanitary conditions of any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The inspections may be made at any time during which a massage establishment is open for business pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Secs. 13-6—13-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-25. - License required. 
No massage shall be administered by a person who is not licensed by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy pursuant to O.C.G.A. Article 43, Chapter 24A. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-26. - Issuance. 
Following the submission of an application for a license required by this article, either for an initial or renewal license, the following procedure or requirement shall apply thereto in addition to those elsewhere specified in this article: 
(1)	Any investigation or inquiry pertaining to the information provided on the license application as may be considered reasonable and necessary shall be made by the city. The investigation and inquiry shall be concluded within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the application for a license except that if for any reason the investigation or inquiry is not concluded, the city shall so notify the applicant of that situation. The notice shall specify a reasonable period within which the city expects to conclude the investigation and inquiry, the reasonable period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
(2)	Upon the expiration of the period above specified or as extended, if the city is unable to conclude the investigation and inquiry by reason of inability to obtain information, the applicant shall be so notified in writing by the city and given a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days during which the applicant may provide the information to the city as the city may consider accurate and complete. Upon the failure to obtain the information or to confirm the accuracy or completeness of the same, the city shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant. 
(3)	If upon concluding the review, investigation and inquiry of the application and the applicant, the city determines that any information provided in the application is false or that the information provided in the application or as determined by the city upon its investigation and inquiry the following facts are found to exist, the city shall not issue a license to the applicant: 
a.	The health certificate required for any massage therapist and required to be attached to an application is absent. 
b.	Any massage therapist employed or to be employed in any massage establishment does not have a license issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy pursuant to O.C.G.A. Article 43, Chapter 24A and has not submitted an application for the same prior to the filing of an application for a massage establishment license by the applicant therefor. 
c.	The applicant, if an individual, for any license required by this article or any person or entity owning and/or controlling the applicant including but not limited to all partners, principals or managers and also if the applicant is a corporation, an officer, director or shareholder holding at least ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation has been convicted of any violation of this article within the twelve (12) months preceding the date of the filing of the application or any offense specified in section 13-52(10). 
d.	The applicant has previously had a license required by this article revoked, or is at the time of filing an application for a license, presently holding a license which is under suspension pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(4)	Upon refusal to issue a license as above provided, the city shall give to the applicant notice which shall contain the reasons for failure to issue the license. 
(5)	The applicant may within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice petition to the governing body for a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not a license shall be granted to the applicant. The hearing shall be scheduled and conducted at any regular or special meeting of the governing body to be held within thirty (30) days of the date the petition is filed and with written notice to the applicant of the time, date and place of the hearing unless postponed with the consent of the applicant or by motion adopted at meeting of the governing body specifying a subsequent date for a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-27. - Fees. 
The fees or charges for the licenses required pursuant to this article shall be as specified by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-28. - Duration. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid, except as otherwise provided herein, from the date of issuance through December thirty-first of the year in which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-29. - Display. 
Any license obtained under this article shall be posted and kept in a conspicuous place in the massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-30. - Assignment. 
Any license issued under this article shall not be assignable to any other person or other entity. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-31. - Suspension and revocation. 
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation subject to the following violations and procedures: 
(1)	The city may suspend a license issued to and held by a massage establishment upon any of the following grounds: 
a.	A massage therapist who has an infectious or communicable disease has administered a massage at a licensed massage establishment. 
b.	Any massage therapist employed by a massage establishment or any party specified in section 13-52(9) has been convicted of any violation of this chapter or crime specified in section 13-52(10). 
c.	Any massage therapist employed by a massage establishment has violated or permitted to be violated any provision of article III of the chapter. 
(2)	The city shall have authority to suspend a license for a period of from one (1) day to ninety (90) days for each occasion upon which one (1) of the grounds for suspension as above set forth has occurred. The suspension shall be effective from the time specified or during the period specified pursuant to a hearing as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(3)	Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary as specified in the subsection above, the city shall have authority to suspend a license instantly without hearing, to be effective until a hearing as herein provided, whenever any holder of a license issued pursuant to this article: 
a.	Shall have violated any provision for suspension as specified in subsection (1) above on more than one (1) occasion or occurrence prior to a hearing as specified herein; or 
b.	A hearing as specified herein is not held as scheduled by reason of postponement of the same by the holder of the license. 
(4)	The city may revoke a license issued pursuant to this article for any of the following reasons: 
a.	Whenever in the judgment of the governing body any holder of a license has violated a provision for suspension as specified in subsection (1) above, the violation is of sufficient excess, neglect or aggravation as to require revocation rather than suspension or upon a judgment that the violation of this chapter is continuous. 
b.	That the holder of a license issued pursuant to this article has had the license suspended on more than one (1) occasion during any calendar year wherein revocation of the license shall be automatic. 
(5)	Any proceeding for suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this article shall be pursuant to the following procedures: 
a.	Notice of the proceeding to be recommended or pursued by the city shall be given to the holder of the license specifying the proceeding recommended or to be pursued and the reason therefor pursuant to subsection (1) above. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of hearing on the matter at a regular or special meeting of the governing body and, if the provisions of subsection (3) above are being followed, a statement that the license is suspended from the time of service of the notice until the hearing. 
b.	The hearing as specified herein shall be held within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice being served upon the holder of the license unless postponed with the consent of the holder of the license or by motion adopted at the meeting of council specifying a subsequent date for a hearing. 
c.	At the hearing the holder of the license shall be required to present the license to the city prior to being heard at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing the license shall either be marked "revoked" or "suspended" with the period of suspension specified thereon or returned to the holder if no action of suspension or revocation is effected. 
d.	Subsequent to any action of suspension or revocation as provided herein, the city shall have authority to place one (1) or more notices upon any massage establishment in a conspicuous place or places that the license issued to that establishment has been suspended or revoked and that the same is not open for the business of providing massages without the establishment holding a valid license issued pursuant to this article. In the event that the holder of a license fails to deliver the same to the city as regulated herein or upon the license being suspended pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, the city shall have the authority to take possession of the license from the holder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Secs. 13-32—13-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE 

Sec. 13-51. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment within the city without first obtaining a license to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-52. - Application, contents. 
The city administrator shall provide to an applicant for a massage establishment license, a form containing the information hereinafter specified which shall be completed and filed with the city administrator by each applicant for such license, and which shall be accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
(1)	The kind of business to be operated; 
(2)	The name of the business; 
(3)	The location where the business is proposed to be carried on and the telephone number at the location; 
(4)	The legal name of the applicant for the license. If the applicant is a corporation, the date upon which the corporation was registered pursuant to the laws of the state; the name of its registered agent; the address of its registered office if the same is different from the address of the location of the business. If the business is not a corporation, the name, home addresses and home telephone numbers of all persons having an ownership interest in the business; 
(5)	The addresses of any residences of the applicant within the ninety (90) days preceding the date of the application; 
(6)	The home address of the applicant and telephone number and the length at which the applicant has been a resident of the address; 
(7)	The Social Security and federal employer's identification number of the applicant; 
(8)	The names and addresses of all massage therapists to be employed or presently employed by the applicant with a health certificate issued not less than fifteen (15) days prior to submitting the application to be attached to that application for each listed massage therapist. In addition, for each massage therapist, the application must include a copy of the license issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy pursuant to O.C.G.A. Article 43, Chapter 24A; 
(9)	Names and addresses of all persons or legal entities owning and/or controlling the applicant, including but not limited to all partners, principals or managers and also if the applicant is a corporation then the officers, directors and shareholders holding at least ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation; 
(10)	Disclosure as to all employees of the applicant and any and all partners, managers or principals of the applicant and also in the event the applicant is a corporation, all officers, directors or stockholders holding ten (10) percent or more of the capital stock of the applicant specifying all final convictions occurring within five (5) years of the date of the application of any federal or state offense which is a felony or any misdemeanor offense of sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy or lewd house, keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, assault or battery or masturbation for hire. If such conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which the conviction was entered; 
(11)	The applicant shall acknowledge that pursuant to this chapter the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information above provided and that if the inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of the information, the city has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the person about whom the information is disputed, and the applicant shall be required to provide such to the city upon the request of that official prior to that official making a final decision as to approving or denying the license; 
(12)	The names and residential telephone numbers and addresses for the last year of all proposed or present employees of the massage establishment for which the application is being made; and 
(13)	The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the real property on which the massage establishment will be located so that the party may be located if necessary by any city employee or official during day or evening hours. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-53. - Changes in application information. 
The holder of any license issued pursuant to this division shall within seven (7) days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided in section 13-52(8), (9) and (10) shall transmit the same in writing to the city administrator. The transmittal shall specify the changed information in accordance with the provisions of these subsections in the same manner as if the information was specified in a license application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-54. - Conditions precedent to issuance. 
No license to engage in the business of operating a massage establishment shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the city administrator and no massage establishment shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the city until the license has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-55. - Change of location, procedures. 
The license issued pursuant to this division shall be valid only at the location specified in the license as issued. Any change in the location of the massage establishment other than by ceasing business at a location shall require the filing of an application for a license pursuant to the requirements of this division. In the event the application is filed for the purpose of changing the location of the massage establishment, without adding thereto any total number of locations in excess of those for which the applicant presently holds a license, no additional license fee for the calendar year in which the massage establishment holds a valid license pursuant to this division shall be charged except that the city administrator may impose a processing charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per application in such event. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Secs. 13-56—13-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONAL RULES 

Sec. 13-71. - Compliance. 
Any massage establishment in operation pursuant to a license issued as required by this chapter shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article in the conduct and operation of its business. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-72. - Sanitary maintenance; standards of cleanliness. 
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization before initial use, and any such instruments and devices or parts thereof, after having been used upon one (1) patron, shall be sterilized before using the same upon another. No towels and linens shall be furnished for use of another until thoroughly laundered. All massage therapists shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering a massage to each patron accommodated. No person suffering from an infectious or communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment. No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when, to the knowledge of the owner, person in control, or any employee, the person is suffering from an infectious or communicable disease. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-73. - Obstruction of view. 
The door to each room in which massages are administered shall be removed or not closed or a clear glass panel not less than ten (10) inches by twelve (12) inches or one (1) observation device having an angle of view of at least sixty (60) degrees into the room shall be placed in the upper portion of the door to each room in which massages are administered if the door is closed. The view through the clear glass shall not be obscured by any means. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-74. - List of services. 
Every massage establishment shall post in a conspicuous place, available for observation by all patrons, a printed list of all services performed or available as provided by the massage establishment and the price or prices therefor in bold printing with lettering not less than one (1) inch high for each character and the notice shall specify whether or not the payment of any gratuity to any massage therapist or other employee of the massage establishment is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-75. - Location of massage restricted. 
No massage establishment shall arrange for the administration of a massage under the license applicable to the party except upon the premises of the massage establishment and at the location specified in the application for the license. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-76. - Hours of operation. 
No massage establishment shall be open for the business of providing massages during any day prior to 8:30 a.m. and subsequent to 12:00 midnight Eastern Standard Time or such other daylight or standard time as may be applicable to the geographical territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-77. - Coverage, touching certain parts of the body. 
No person shall receive a massage at a massage establishment unless the patron is covered by opaque material such as a towel or shorts covering the hips, genitals and anal areas. No massage therapist employed by a massage establishment shall touch the genitals or anal area of any patron or the breast if the patron is a female, nor shall a patron touch the genitals or anal area of a massage therapist, and if the massage therapist is a female, the prohibited area shall include the breast. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-78. - Massage of persons of opposite sex. 
No massage therapist employed by a massage establishment shall administer a massage to a person of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-79. - Minors. 
No massage shall be administered at a massage establishment to any person who is a minor as defined by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Sec. 13-80. - Medical exceptions. 
In the administration of any massage, the provisions of sections 13-77, 13-78 and 13-79 shall not be applicable to any person for whom a massage is ordered upon the written certificate of a licensed physician, osteopath or chiropractor; provided that such certificate shall be signed by the physician, osteopath or chiropractor, be dated, shall specifically state the number of treatments recommended therein and further that the date and hour of each treatment given pursuant to the certificate, the name of the massage therapist giving the treatment, and the name of the patron receiving the treatment shall be maintained in a record to be preserved by the owner or operator of the massage establishment for a period of two (2) years and shall be available for inspection by the city or its designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-4-12) 
Chapter 14 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - State law misdemeanors. 
Any act the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state is prohibited within the city, and if committed within the city, is hereby declared to be an offense against the city; provided however, that the penalty therefor shall be as prescribed by statute. 
(Code 1977, § 12-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Air pollution control; adoption of county regulation. 
The air pollution control health regulation, number 24 of Fulton County, a copy of which is on file in the city administrator's office, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Code, in its entirety, except that section 22.1 is struck in its entirety and the following inserted in lieu thereof: 
"Section 22.1: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of, or who fails to perform any duty imposed by this regulation or who violates any order or determination of any lawful authority promulgated pursuant to this regulation shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of the Code of Ordinances, and in addition thereto may be enjoined from continuing such violation. Each day violations occur shall constitute a separate offense." 
(Code 1977, § 11-3) 
Secs. 14-3—14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 14-26. - Trespassing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly and without authority: 
(1)	Enter upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft or watercraft of another person, for an unlawful purpose. 
(2)	Enter upon the land or premises of another person or onto any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft or watercraft of another person, after receiving, prior to such entry notice from the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden. 
(3)	Remain upon the land or premises of another person or within the vehicle, railroad car, aircraft or watercraft of another person, after receiving notice from the owner or rightful occupant to depart. 
(4)	To enter or remain upon any land or premises of the city, or any other public place within the city, after the expiration of any posted closing time, or after being notified by an official responsible for the control or management of such public place that such is at that time not open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-27, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 14-27. - Vandalism. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to: 
(1)	Intentionally damage any property of another without his consent and the damage thereto is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less. 
(2)	Knowingly and maliciously interfere with the possession or use of the property of another person without his consent. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-26, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-23. 
Sec. 14-28. - Advertising matter. 
(a)	Placing in or on motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a motor vehicle which is parked on a public street or on private grounds, to place on or inside such parked motor vehicle any placard, handbill, card or advertising matter. 
(b)	Distribution generally. It shall be unlawful for any person distributing or causing to be distributed within the city circulars, handbills, papers or other printed advertising through the city, to throw or scatter the same upon any of the streets, sidewalks or alleys or other public places in the city; and further, it shall be unlawful for any person receiving circulars, handbills, papers or other printed advertising matter from distributors, to throw or scatter the same upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places in the city. 
(c)	Pasting, posting, fastening. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to paste, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster or advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, on any curbstone, lamppost, pole, fence, wire, bridge or tree upon any public property within the city, or upon any private property without the written consent of the owner of such property. 
(d)	Tearing down, mutilating. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, without lawful authority, to tear down or mutilate any bill, placard or other advertisement lawfully posted. 
(Code 1977, § 12-2) 
Sec. 14-29. - Animals in the parks. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person who harbors, possesses or is in charge of a domestic restrained or unrestrained animal (such as dogs, cats, etc.) to bring said animal onto public-owned tennis courts and outdoor basketball courts. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, graze or walk a horse or other type hoofed animal within municipal parks. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors, or is in charge of any animal not to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal while in the municipal park, on municipal athletic fields, or on municipal sidewalks. Animal excrement shall be removed from the park, athletic fields, and municipal sidewalks, and disposed of in a sanitary means. 
(d)	It shall be the duty of any person having custody or control of any animal in the municipal park on an athletic field, or on the sidewalk to have in such person's possession a device or equipment for picking up and removal of the animal excrement. The provisions of this section shall not apply to an animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal when in police or rescue activities. 
(Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 4-1-02) 
Secs. 14-30—14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 14-46. - Affray. 
It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to engage in an affray or altercation within the city to the disturbance of the public tranquility. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-18, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32. 
Sec. 14-47. - Public disturbance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, procession or the public tranquility within the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-19, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 14-48. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverages in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public way or public place within the city or within any public building thereon. Such shall be an offense against the city, punishable by the terms and conditions applicable to the municipal court. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3.5) 
Sec. 14-49. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear to be in an intoxicated condition on the streets of the town, or in any public place, or place of business patronized by the public, or in an automobile, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterous or by indecent condition or by act of voicing profane or loud or unbecoming language, within the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-20, 9-8-80; Ord. No. 99-01, 1-4-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 14-50. - Loitering. 
(a)	Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to gather, loiter, congregate or assemble with others, on any of the public streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city, in such manner, and/or to such an extent as to prevent or interfere with the free and unobstructed passage or travel of pedestrians thereon or thereover, or with the free and unobstructed access of pedestrians to, and/or from private property or buildings or other structures abutting on such streets, sidewalks or other public places. 
(b)	Near election places. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, within the legal hours of election on any election day, to loiter, gather, congregate or assemble at any point or place on the streets, sidewalks or other public places in the city nearer than twenty-five (25) feet from the entrance or entrances of any voting place or precinct within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12-6) 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36; obstructing highways, streets, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 14-51. - Abusive or obscene language. 
It shall be unlawful within the city for any person, without provocation, to use to or of another, in his presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; or words that as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in his presence naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, or words commonly called fighting words. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-22, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 14-52. - Litter control. 
(a)	General provisions. 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this section are: 
a.	Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
b.	Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(2)	Applicability. This section shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(3)	Compatibility with other regulations. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(4)	Severability. If the provisions of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term in defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any street, road or highway; and body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(c)	Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)	The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed for such purpose on such property; or 
(3)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(d)	Vehicle loads causing litter. No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of material from such load onto the roadway. 
(e)	Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(1)	Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(2)	Evidence. 
a.	Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
b.	Except as provided in subsection (a), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall create a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. 
(3)	Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
a.	By a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00); and 
b.	In addition to the fine set out in subsection a. above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is removed or is ordered removed by the city; and 
c.	1.	In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the execution of sentence; or 
2.	In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the execution of sentence; and 
d.	The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this section. 
(d)	Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, adopted May 3, 2004, repealed section 14-52 in its entirety and replaced it with a new section 14-52. Former section 14-52 pertained to litter on highways, land or water of another, and derived from Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-23, adopted Sept. 8, 1980. 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 
Cross reference— Solid waste, § 24-151 et seq. 
Sec. 14-53. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following provisions of this section: 
(1)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)	Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct as so to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with one (1) or more persons for the purpose or with the intent in gaming; 
(5)	Any person who shall frequent any public place with the intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, artifices or devices; 
(6)	Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(7)	Any person who shall accost or force his company upon any person; 
(8)	Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(9)	Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(10)	Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(11)	Any person who shall congregate with one (1) or more persons in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and who refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority; 
(12)	Any person who shall disrupt, by excessive noise or disorderly actions, the undisturbed activities of any institution of learning, house of worship or any hospital; 
(13)	Any person who shall throw any bottle, paper, can, glass, stick, stone, missile or any other debris on public property. 
(Ord. No. 90-03, 4-2-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-03, adopted Apr. 2, 1990, added § 12-29, which section has been redesignated by the editor as § 14-53. 
Sec. 14-54. - Curfew. 
(a)	Purpose . It is the responsibility of the mayor and council for the city to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Palmetto. The mayor and council are concerned about the increase in criminal activity engaged in by minors especially those crimes that occur after hours and/or times in which juveniles should be at home. In an effort to keep our community safe by reducing the numbers of crimes that are committed by and against minors after hours, the mayor and council believe that a curfew ordinance is in the best interest of the citizens of Palmetto. Accordingly, the mayor and council for the City of Palmetto find and declare that the purpose of this section is to reduce the number of crimes committed by and against juveniles after hours, and to safeguard the welfare of our children. 
(b)	Definitions . The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall be construed as defined in this subsection: 
Adult means: 
(1)	A person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor; or 
(2)	An emancipated minor. 
City means the City of Palmetto, Georgia. 
Curfew hours means between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday through Thursday and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day except in circumstances set out in subsection (d) of this section. 
Emancipated minor means: 
(1)	Any person under the age of eighteen (18) who is married or who is not under the care, custody, and control of a parent, guardian, person standing in loco parentis, or the juvenile court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(2)	Any person under the age of eighteen (18) who has had the disabilities of minority removed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means: 
(1)	A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)	A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
Minor means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, an adopted parent, or stepparent of another person. ;p0; Public place means any place to which the public has access including, but not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
Remain means: 
(1)	Linger or stay; or 
(2)	Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or the person in control of the premises. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that cases death or creates a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss, or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(c)	(1)	It is unlawful for any person less than eighteen (18) years of age to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child less eighteen (18) years of age to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow, such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in this section within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday through Thursday and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to be in or upon the premises of an establishment in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday through Thursday and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsection (d) of this section. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Palmetto Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)	The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)	When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)	When the minor is upon an errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)	When the minor is attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(4)	When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(5)	When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)	When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through the city excepted in all cases from the curfew; or 
(7)	When the minor is involved in an emergency situation. 
(e)	(1)	A police officer of the city who has probable cause to believe that a minor is in violation of this section shall: 
a.	Ascertain the name and address of the minor; 
b.	Issue the minor a written warning that the minor is in violation of this section; and 
c.	Order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route. 
(2)	Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, a police officer who has probable cause to believe that the minor is in violation of this section, shall transport the minor to the police department if: 
a.	The minor has received one (1) previous warning for violation of this article; or 
b.	Reasonable grounds exist to believe the minor has engaged in delinquent conduct. 
(3)	When a minor is taken to the police department, the minor's parents shall be immediately contacted. If after this contact there is still probable cause to believe that the minor was violating this section, the minor shall be held until the parent comes to take the minor home. If no parent has arrived within two (2) hours, or the parent has refused to retrieve the minor for whatever reason, the minor shall be turned over to the custody of the local juvenile authorities until a parent can take custody of him or her. When the parent arrives, he or she shall be given a copy of this section. 
(4)	Second violation. 
a.	In case of a second violation by a minor, the chief of police shall, by certified mail, send to the minor's parent written notice of said violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties. Said notice shall be sent to the minor's parent at his or her last known address and evidence of its mailing shall constitute sufficient notice of the minor's violation. 
b.	If, after the mailing of the warning notice set forth in (e)(4)a. herein, a parent violates subsection (c)(2) of this section (in connection with a third violation by a minor), this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. Upon conviction, a person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and costs, or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than sixty (60) days, or work on the public streets or work on the public works of the city for not more than sixty (60) days, or be subject to any one (1) or more of the punishments; subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(5)	Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this section more than two (2) times shall be dealt with through the applicable juvenile court, or such other court as shall have jurisdiction of said minor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 6-6-11) 
Secs. 14-55—14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 14-71. - Weapons—Carrying a pistol without a license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his person within the city, outside of his home, motor vehicle or place of business any pistol or revolver without having on his person a valid license issued by the judge of the probate court of the county in which he resides. No permit shall be required for persons with a valid hunting license or fishing license on their person or to persons not required by law to have hunting licenses who are engaged in legal hunting, fishing or sports shooting when said persons have the permission of the owner of the land on which said activities are being conducted and fully provided that the pistol or revolver, whenever loaded, shall be carried only in an open and fully exposed manner. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-25, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-128. 
Sec. 14-72. - Same—Discharging firearms. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to fire, discharge, shoot any gun, pistol or other firearm within the city, unless it is in a regularly licensed shooting gallery, or in actual defense of self, habitation or property. 
(b)	Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to: 
(1)	Law enforcement officers engaged in their official duties as such. 
(2)	Members of the armed forces of the United States or national guard, engaged in their official duties as such. 
(Code 1977, § 12-14) 
Sec. 14-72.1. - Same—Improper display or reckless conduct re firearm. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause bodily harm to or endanger the bodily safety of another person by consciously disregarding a substantial and unjustifiable risk so that his or her act or omission will cause harm or endanger the safety of the other person, and that disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which an ordinary person would exercise in the situation. In addition to the above, any person who recklessly displays a firearm which endangers the bodily safety of another person by consciously disregarding a substantial and justifiable risk that his or her act or omission will cause harm or endanger the safety of the other person, and such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in this situation shall also engage in such unlawful conduct [sic]. 
(Ord. No. 90-01, 2-5-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-01, adopted Feb. 5, 1990, added a new § 12-25(a), which section has been redesignated by the editor as § 14-72. 
Sec. 14-73. - Same—Carrying knives, razors and similar devices. 
It shall be unlawful to have, possess or carry upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property of the city, any of the following implements unless the same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
(1)	Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(2)	Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(3)	Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than four (4) inches. This shall include all knives, such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close. 
(4)	Any razor. 
(5)	Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, except that this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Code 1977, § 12-15) 
State Law reference— Carrying concealed knives, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-126. 
Sec. 14-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 2015, repealed § 14-74, which pertained to fireworks. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 14-75. - Crop dusting, low-flying aircraft. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged any chemical, fertilizer or other substance intended for dispersal on the soil or foliage from an aircraft within the city. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any chemical, fertilizer or other substance intended for dispersal on the soil or foliage released from an aircraft outside the city in a manner in which it would be reasonably calculated that such substances would settle on the soil, buildings or foliage, within the city. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to fly or operate an aircraft at an altitude lower than two hundred (200) feet, except for take-off and landing, within the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-5, § 12-17, 6-2-80) 
Sec. 14-76. - Open wells and pits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner or occupant of premises within the city whereon any open well or open pit is located, to maintain or permit to remain open and uncovered any such open and uncovered well or pit. 
(Code 1977, § 11-2) 
Secs. 14-77—14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 14-91. - Public indecency. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts in a public place within the city: 
(1)	An act of sexual intercourse. 
(2)	A lewd exposure of the sexual organs. 
(3)	A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity. 
(4)	A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-28, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 14-92. - Dives. 
(a)	Defined. The word "dive" as used in this section is defined as a place where alcoholic malt or vinous liquors are kept or sold, and where men and women are permitted to come and drink alcoholic, malt or vinous liquors, either in the place or room where such liquors are kept and sold, or in a place of business or other place connected therewith, or in a place not connected with such place where such liquors are kept and sold, and where men and women drink or commit acts of immorality in such place, or a place where men and women idle away their time without visible means of support and do not do any work. 
(b)	Maintaining. It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself, or as agent of another, to keep or maintain a dive within the city. 
(c)	Patronizing. It shall be unlawful for any person to go into a dive for the purpose of drinking alcoholic, malt or vinous liquors, or for any person without visible means of support, or who does not do any work, to go to such place for the purpose of idling away his time, or for any reason at such place to commit acts of immorality. 
(Code 1977, § 12-4) 
Sec. 14-93. - Gaming. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following acts within the city: 
(1)	Making or placing a bet upon the partial or final results of any game or contest or upon the performance of any participant in such game or contest. 
(2)	Making or placing a bet upon the result of any political nomination, appointment, election or upon the degree of success of any nominee, appointee or candidate. 
(3)	Playing and betting for money or any other thing of value at any game played with cards, dice, or balls. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-24, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2. 
Sec. 14-94. - Begging, soliciting alms. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person habitually to ask, beg or solicit alms in the city from any person whomsoever except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)	No person except personnel from the Community Chest, Salvation Army and American Red Cross shall solicit any funds from the general public or on the streets for charitable, eleemosynary, or fraternal purposes until and unless a permit shall have been granted by the police committee and approved by the governing body. 
(2)	Before any permit shall be granted the names of all persons who shall be engaged in such solicitation shall accompany the application, with the statement that no person soliciting such fund will be paid a salary or commission. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to solicit or secure charitable contributions under false pretenses. 
(Code 1977, § 12-6) 
Sec. 14-95. - Possession of marijuana. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess one (1) ounce or less of marijuana within the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 1, 5-4-87) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6. 
Secs. 14-96—14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 14-111. - Obstruction of officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully obstruct or hinder any officer of the police department in the lawful discharge of his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-17, 9-8-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 14-112. - False alarm. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transmit in any manner to the fire department, police department, or to any other group which is organized for the purpose of preventing or controlling emergencies within the city, a false report of an emergency, knowing or having reason to know at the time that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such emergency exists. 
(Ord. No. 80-8, § 12-21, 9-8-80) 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, ch. 3. 
State Law reference— False alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26 et seq. 
Chapter 15 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, adopted Oct. 1, 2012, repealed former Ch. 15, § 15-1, and enacted a new Ch. 15 as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to municipal court sessions and derived from Code 1977, § 2-2. 
Charter reference— Municipal court generally, § 41.1 et seq.; appointment of recorder, § 14.1. 
Cross reference— General penalty for ordinance violation, § 1-8. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1—15-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICE OF PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 

Sec. 15-11. - Intent. 
In enacting this article, it is the intent of the city to comply with Georgia law, particularly O.C.G.A. Title 15, Chapter 18, Article 5. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 10-1-12) 
Sec. 15-12. - Establishment of office. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Palmetto in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal courts as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 10-1-12) 
Sec. 15-13. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court of the City of Palmetto shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 10-1-12) 
Sec. 15-14. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court of the City of Palmetto shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Palmetto. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 10-1-12) 
Sec. 15-15. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the Charter for the City of Palmetto, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 10-1-12) 
Sec. 15-16. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
The Office of the Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court of the City of Palmetto shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the City Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 10-1-12) 
Sec. 15-17. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one (1) or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 10-1-12) 
Sec. 15-18. - Ratification. 
This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3, 10-1-12) 
Chapter 16 - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-1. - Prohibited; enumeration. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city. 
(b)	The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)	Racing motors, etc. The emitting of loud noises by racing the motor of any motor vehicle. The use of a muffler on a motor vehicle that emits loud and harsh noises. 
(2)	Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, truck, tractor or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger or passing warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary purpose; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic for any reason is delayed or stopped. 
(3)	Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)	Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird, which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity. 
(5)	Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or to stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper city authorities. 
(6)	Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine or motor vehicle, except tractors, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)	Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or operated in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(8)	Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(9)	In vicinity of schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning or church while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed on such streets indicating that the same is a school or hospital street. 
(10)	Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(11)	Drums, other instruments. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(12)	Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(13)	Loudspeakers, amplifiers, devices for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other similar machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure, except by special written permit issued by the chief of police or by the mayor upon application duly made. Such a permit shall be issued if the proposed activity will not endanger the public peace or safety. 
(Code 1977, § 12-7) 
Sec. 16-2. - Automobile repair shops. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use automobile repair shop premises at any time on Sundays or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on weekdays in such a manner as will emit noises of a disagreeable or annoying nature. 
(Code 1977, § 12-8) 
Sec. 16-3. - Use of public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the public sidewalks, streets or other public premises at any time on Sunday, or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on weekdays in such a manner as will emit noises of a disagreeable or annoying nature. 
(Code 1977, § 12-9) 
Sec. 16-4. - Blowing railroad whistles. 
It shall be unlawful to blow a locomotive whistle within the city, except where it is necessary to prevent accidents, or where it is necessary to signal the engineers of opposing trains of the approach of any passenger train, or any section following the same, or when it is necessary to signal a brakeman to protect the rear of such train when the train has made an unscheduled stop and there is danger of a rear-end collision. 
(Code 1977, § 12-10) 
Chapter 17 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 5; noise, ch. 16; shrubbery constituting hazard at street corner, § 23-10; abandoned or junked motorized vehicles, § 24-157; accumulations of solid waste, § 24-157. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - General definitions. 
(a)	In this article the term "nuisance" in general terms shall be construed to mean anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be legal does not keep it from being a nuisance. The consequences complained of must not be fanciful or such as would only affect a person of fastidious tastes, but it must be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. "Nuisance" as defined herein shall be in addition to all other definitions of nuisance contained in this Code and ordinances of the city. 
(b)	The term "nuisance" is further defined to mean whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome. 
(Code 1977, § 11-20) 
Sec. 17-2. - Specific definitions. 
The following are specifically declared to be nuisances: 
(1)	Toilets, other sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers in bad repair. 
(2)	Conditions conducive to the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other insects. 
(3)	Pollution of the air by gases, vapors, fumes, mists, dusts or smoke in quantities sufficient to be disagreeable, discomforting, or detrimental to health or well being. 
(4)	The burning of combustible material in the open air without prior notice to, and the obtaining of a permit from the fire department, is hereby specifically declared to be a nuisance, harmful to the health of persons and dangerous to the safety of life and property. The fire department shall prepare and make available forms for use in applying for and obtaining such permit. 
(5)	Trash, garbage, refuse or any foul, decaying, or putrescent material kept or used in such a manner or place as to be or become offensive, objectionable or detrimental to health or well being. 
(6)	Any animal or fowl kept in violation of chapter 5. 
(7)	Any other condition declared in this Code to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 11-21) 
Sec. 17-3. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, maintain, support, aid or continue a nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 11-22) 
Sec. 17-4. - Abatement powers generally; authority of Fulton County Health Department. 
The city retains all powers to abate nuisances granted to it under the constitution of the state, the laws of the state, the city charter and city ordinances not in conflict herewith. The Fulton County Health Department is given authority to enforce this chapter within that part of the city that is within Fulton County, and for that purpose no existing ordinance shall conflict therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 11-24) 
Secs. 17-5—17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES 

Sec. 17-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle shall mean one that is in a state of disrepair and incapable of being moved under its own power. 
Abandoned or inoperative icebox, refrigerator, stove or other appliance, or machinery and equipment shall mean items incapable of or not being used for the purpose for which they were intended. 
Glass, building materials, building rubbish or similar items shall mean items not being used on a daily basis, subject to weather, used in normal building progress, for building work performed on or adjacent to the subject residential property. 
Residential property shall mean any property, improved or not, zoned as residential property or when more than fifty (50) percent of the adjacent or surrounding property (determined by lot division and not land area) is used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 11-30) 
Sec. 17-27. - Punishment for violation. 
(a)	Any person found guilty of violation of this Article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(b)	Each ten (10) days' continuance of the offense after a defendant has been found guilty as herein provided shall be considered a new offense and a citation may be issued thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 11-37; Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 4-3-06) 
Sec. 17-28. - Exclusions. 
This article shall not apply to persons holding a valid business license for dealing in the above specified items in the condition herein referred to, provided all zoning ordinances and other ordinances and laws are complied with. 
(Code 1977, § 11-34) 
Sec. 17-29. - Property generally—Dead trees, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any real property to permit such property to become saturated or covered or filled with dead trees, bushes, weeds, grass above six (6) inches in height, garbage, trash, rubbish, tin cans, debris or other hazardous matter and materials. 
(Code 1977, § 11-31) 
Sec. 17-30. - Same—Exterior of buildings; vacant lots. 
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, or inhabitant of any building or dwelling to keep the exterior of such building, dwelling or dwelling unit, including its premises, yards, lawns, courts and alleys clean, clear and free of any accumulation of any deposits or accumulation of the items specified in this article; provided, the owner of a dwelling or business building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, tenants or occupants thereof shall be responsible for maintaining the shared or public area of the dwelling or building and premises thereof. The same duty shall rest upon the owner of any vacant lot. 
(Code 1977, § 11-32) 
Sec. 17-31. - Same—Residential property. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential building, structure, or property to utilize the premises of such residential property for the open storage of any abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, junked and/or inoperative icebox, refrigerator, stove, or more than one (1) motor vehicle, other appliance, machinery, and/or equipment, or the open storage of glass, building material, building rubbish, or similar items. 
(b)	It shall be lawful for the owner or occupant of a residential building, structure or property to utilize the premises of such residential property for the open storage of no more than one (1) abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, junked and/or inoperative motor vehicle but only so long as said motor vehicle persists in the abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, junked and/or inoperative condition only during such time as some person is working to cure the abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, junked and/or inoperative condition of said motor vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 11-33; Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 4-3-06) 
Sec. 17-32. - Removal by owner or occupant. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner or occupant of residential property to keep the premises of such property clean and to remove from the premises all such items, as listed above, upon notice from the building inspector. Such notice shall be in writing and shall set forth the hazard to be removed. This notice shall require the owner or occupant to remove the hazard within thirty (30) days or file an appeal in writing to the housing board of adjustment and appeals. If the occupant is not the owner of record, according to the city tax returns, a copy of such notice shall be delivered or mailed to the owner. 
(Code 1977, § 11-35) 
Sec. 17-33. - Removal by city. 
Should the owner or occupant, after notice, fail to remove the hazard as complained of, it shall be the duty of the building inspector to cause the same to be removed by the use of city equipment and employees. The total cost to the city for removing such hazard shall be a special lien against the property and shall be placed upon the tax records of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-36) 
Secs. 17-34—17-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 17-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing shall mean securing and causing a dwelling, building or a structure to be vacated. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures shall mean any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest shall mean persons in possession of such property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public authority shall mean any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the municipality. 
Public officer shall mean the building inspector, health inspector or any other officer or officers who are authorized by this article to exercise the powers set out in this article, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any officer or officers appointed by the governing body for purposes of this article. 
Repair shall mean closing a dwelling, building or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 17-52. - Findings and applicability. 
(a)	It is found and declared that there exists in the city dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of this city, and that this city should exercise its police power to repair, close or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings or structures in the manner provided in this article. 
(b)	All the provisions of this article including method and procedure may also be applied to private property where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions shall create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Sec. 17-53. - Unfit buildings or structures. 
(a)	Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his designated agent) at a place within the city, fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of such complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
(b)	If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure. 
In no event shall the governing body require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
(c)	If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)	If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be removed or demolished; provided however, that the duties of the public officer, set forth in paragraph (c) of this section and in this paragraph, shall not be exercised until the governing body shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property or properties which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. 
(e)	The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the public officer in the office of the city administrator on a lien docket maintained by the administrator for such purposes. If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer he shall set the materials of such dwellings, buildings or structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court of the county by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(f)	The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)	The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city within thirty (30) days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum, in three (3) equal annual payments, each of which shall be come due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(2)	Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)	Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358, and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any persons having any right, title or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4, art. 3 [§ 48-4-220 et seq.]. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 17-54. - Determination that structure is unfit. 
The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the city; such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)	Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities. 
(2)	Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities. 
(3)	Dilapidation. 
(4)	Disrepair. 
(5)	Structural defects. 
(6)	Uncleanliness. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-10. 
Sec. 17-55. - Powers of public officers in regard to unfit buildings or structures. 
The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use. 
(2)	To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence. 
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the person in possession. 
(4)	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(5)	To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
Sec. 17-56. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures. 
(a)	Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizens of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon each person in possession of the property, each owner, and each part in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner and party in interest. 
(b)	If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party or parties or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen, that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)	Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one (1) printed and published in the county and circulated in the city in which the dwellings, buildings or structures are located. A copy of such complaint or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)	In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the city or is a nonresident, he shall be served as hereinabove provided in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside of the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person or persons; in the case of other persons who live outside of the city or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane persons or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)	In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or orders upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section or service may be perfected upon any person holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)	A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county, and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the city administrator. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
Sec. 17-57. - Injunctions against order to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court of the county for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within fifteen (15) days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within twenty (20) days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13. 
Sec. 17-58. - Taking of unfit buildings or structures by eminent domain; police power. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-14. 
Sec. 17-59. - Authority to use revenues, grants and donations to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
The city may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-15. 
Sec. 17-60. - Conflict with other provisions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-16. 
Secs. 17-61—17-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGISTRATION OF VACANT OR FORECLOSED REAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 17-81. - Definitions. 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in the State of Georgia at which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by the city and is held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)	Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least sixty (60) days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past sixty (60) days; or 
(2)	Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one (1) unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 17-82. - Registration. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, there is hereby created in the City of Palmetto a registry of vacant or foreclosed real properties located within the municipal limits of the city. 
(b)	All vacant or foreclosed real property located within the municipal limits of the city must be registered as provided in this section and article, except as provided in section 17-83. 
(c)	Each registrant shall file with the city administrator a registration form setting out the following information: 
(1)	The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)	If applicable, the agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)	The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)	The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)	At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 17-83. - Transfers. 
(a)	When any real property is acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160 or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure, the transferee shall not be required to register such foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or pay any of the administrative fees provided for in section 17-86 of this article where: 
(1)	The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in section 17-82(c)(1)—(5); 
(2)	The deed is filed with the clerk of superior court within sixty (60) days of the transfer; and 
(3)	Proof of the following is provided to the city administrator: 
a.	A filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.	The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(b)	Registration of vacant or foreclosed real property is not required within ninety (90) days of such real property's transfer: 
(1)	Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)	To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160 or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
Once the aforementioned ninety-day period has expired, registration of such vacant or foreclosed property must be made within thirty (30) days of said expiration. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 17-84. - Updating of information. 
The owner of vacant or foreclosed real property registered with the city shall update the information specified in section 17-82(c)(1)—(5) within thirty (30) days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 17-85. - Removal from registry. 
The owner of vacant or foreclosed real property registered with the city, or the agent of such owner, may apply to remove such vacant or foreclosed real property from the registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes vacant or foreclosed real property. Such application shall be considered by the city administrator, whose determination shall be issued within thirty (30) days of the receipt of said application. If no such determination is made within thirty (30) days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 17-86. - Administrative fees. 
Upon the submission of the registration required in section 17-82, the owner of such vacant or foreclosed real property, or the agent of such owner, shall pay to the city an administrative fee which shall be established by the mayor and council and which shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per registration. Said fee shall reasonably approximate the cost to the city of the establishment, maintenance, operation, and administration of the registry. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 17-87. - Violations. 
Failure to register vacant or foreclosed real property or failure to update the information specified in section 17-82(c)(1)—(5) shall be punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 17-88. - Appeals. 
Any vacant or foreclosed real property owner affected by this article may challenge any determination made by the city or its officials pursuant to this article by appealing said determination to the Municipal Court of the City of Palmetto. Such appeal shall be filed with the court no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of said determination. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; establishment, etc., of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Use generally. 
(a)	In this section "city park" means any park that is owned or operated by the city. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to gather, frequent, congregate or assemble with others, in or on any city park, except during the hours of operation above, or except where such activity is authorized by reservation of the park through the city administrator or assistant city administrator. 
(c)	All city parks shall be open for use of the public from sunrise until sundown of each day, with the exception of organized and scheduled events authorized by reservation of the park through the city administrator or assistant city administrator. 
(Code 1977, § 12-16) 
Chapter 19 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; soil erosion, sedimentation control and stormwater management, ch. 21; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

Sec. 19-1. - City planner. 
(a)	There is hereby created the position within the city known as city planner. The city planner shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council, and shall serve at their pleasure. 
(b)	The position of city planner shall be a part-time employment until such time as the governing body decide otherwise. The salary to be paid to the city planner shall be fixed and approved by the governing body. 
(c)	The city planner shall have the following duties: 
(1)	To analyze land uses and study all zoning requests and appeals to the zoning board of appeals as may be required by the governing body. 
(2)	To furnish the council with a written recommendation on all zonings and appeals to the zoning board of appeals as requested by the governing body. 
(3)	To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Code, or required by ordinance, regulation or direction of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 88-03, § 2-4, 6-30-88) 
Chapter 20 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Private detectives, § 12-191 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
(a)	Imposition . In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of seventy-five cents ($0.75). 
(b)	Collection . Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8 with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)	Administrative provisions. The Clerk of the City of Palmetto is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of the ordinance from which this section was derived and amendments thereto in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), by December 31, 2011. 
(d)	Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this city from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(d)(2) and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Secs. 20-2—20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Subsistence allowance, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-3; employment and training of peace officers, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-26. - Residence within city not prerequisite to employment. 
It shall not be a prerequisite for law enforcement officers employed by the city to live within the city. This shall be a discretionary matter left solely to the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 13.1-1) 
State Law reference— Residency not to be a prerequisite to employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5. 
Sec. 20-27. - Responsibility for lost property. 
(a)	Property, supposed to have been lost, coming into the possession of any police officer shall be promptly reported and turned in to the chief of police. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see that any lost property coming into possession of the police department or any member thereof, is promptly restored to the rightful owner thereof as soon as such ownership can be determined, except in cases where further possession of the property shall be necessary for use as evidence in the trial of any case. Where such use of such property is necessary, such property shall be retained in custody of the chief of police, unless the chief of police is furnished with good and sufficient bond, with good and sufficient security for the forthcoming protection of such property in court for use as evidence in any such case in which it may be necessary or desirable to have the same for use as evidence; such bond shall be approved by such chief of police. Property retained by such chief of police for use in the trial of a case shall be restored to the rightful owner, if known, as soon as it is practicable after such trial. 
(c)	If the owner of any lost property cannot be determined by search and inquiry, the chief of police, not less than thirty (30) days from the date the same comes into the possession of the police department, shall publish an accurate description of such property in the official newspaper of the city once a week for two (2) consecutive calendar weeks. Such advertised description of the property shall be accompanied by advertisement of notice of the sale of such property, which sale shall be held between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Saturday of the calendar week following the last calendar week in which was published the last advertisement of such notice. The notice of sale shall contain an accurate description of the property and of the time, terms and place of such sale. All such sales shall be public, and shall be in front of the police station, and shall be to the highest bidder for cash. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13.1-2—13.1-4) 
Sec. 20-28. - Responsibility for recovered stolen property. 
(a)	Stolen property recovered by the police department of the city shall be promptly delivered to the rightful owner thereof upon proof of such ownership, subject to the same conditions as set forth in section 20-27. 
(b)	Stolen property recovered by the police department, but which is not claimed by the rightful owners thereof within one (1) year from the date of its recovery shall be sold at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash by the chief of police between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the first Saturday in any month next after publication to the public of the time and place of such sale, which notice shall contain a fair description of the items of property to be sold and state that such items of property were stolen property recovered by the police department more than one (1) year prior to the date of publication of the notice, stating that such items of property will be sold at public outcry between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on the first Saturday next ensuing after the last publication of such notice, which notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the city twice before the date of sale. 
(c)	At the sale of stolen property the title shall not be warranted, nor guaranteed, and the only title the purchaser will acquire will be such title only as the city has thereto. 
(d)	The proceeds from the sale of any stolen property recovered and sold shall be promptly paid to the city treasurer, accompanied by a written report or statement, which statement shall show what property was sold, to whom it was sold, the date of the sale, the price at which it was sold and a reasonable description of the items sold. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13.1-5—13.1-8) 
Secs. 20-29—20-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE 

Sec. 20-46. - Established; supervision; oath; qualifications; call to service. 
There is hereby established in the city an auxiliary police force which shall be operated under the supervision and direction of the chief of police. The members of the auxiliary police force shall take and subscribe the same oath as regular police officers of the city. The members of the auxiliary police force shall not be employees of the city, but shall be comprised of a force of voluntary citizens who agree to serve upon the auxiliary police force and be subject to call to service by the chief of police at such times as their assistance shall be required by the chief of police. 
(Code 1977, § 13.1-16) 
Sec. 20-47. - Approval, certification of members. 
No person shall be permitted to serve upon the auxiliary police force until such time as his services in such capacity have been approved by the chief of police and his name certified to the city administrator as a member of the auxiliary police force. 
(Code 1977, § 13.1-17) 
Sec. 20-48. - Training; compensation. 
The chief of police shall establish such training program as he shall deem necessary in order to properly train the members of the auxiliary police force. The auxiliary police force shall receive no compensation except that, when a member has completed the required program of training, and such fact is certified to by the chief of police, a member shall be authorized to receive from the city reimbursement of any cost incurred in the purchase of a uniform, not to exceed the cost of a uniform for the regular police force of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13.1-18) 
Sec. 20-49. - Authority. 
Whenever the auxiliary police force, or any member thereof, has been called to official duty by the chief of police, such auxiliary police force and any member thereof shall be authorized to exercise any and all powers of law enforcement which may be exercised by a regular police officer of the city, and such law enforcement powers shall continue in any instance until such time as the auxiliary police force, or any member thereof, has been relieved from the assignment to which called. 
(Code 1977, § 13.1-19) 
Chapter 21 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; planning and development, ch. 19; subdivisions, app. A; zoning; app. B. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1—21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 2011, repealed former Article II and enacted a new one as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 12-3-01; Ord. No. 04-06, § 1, 5-3-04. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activities ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4 et seq. 

Sec. 21-26. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Palmetto Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Sec. 21-27. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The region 3 soil and water conservation district. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 21-29(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 21-28(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)	Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)	Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the region 3 soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Sec. 21-28. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 21-29(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Sec. 21-29. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions . Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 21-29(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs . 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in section 21-29(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 21-29(c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 21-29(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)	Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 21-29(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Sec. 21-30. - Application/permit process. 
(a)	General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements . 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the engineering department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 21-30(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 21-29(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four (4) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 21-29(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 21-30(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)	If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(7)	The city will allow for an acceleration of the permitting process if the permit applicant attends a stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting (item 7a) and the project meets one (1) or more of the additional criteria (item 7b or 7c): 
a.	Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before the permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer will meet with the city administrator or his or her designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
i.	Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
ii.	Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
iii.	Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
b.	The site to be developed is a redevelopment site that was considered a brownfield or greyfield (commercial redevelopment) type site. 
c.	The proposed site plan incorporates low impact development or green infrastructure features such as bioretention areas, rain gardens, rain water harvesting, green roofs, vegetated swales, re-vegetating stream buffers, porous pavement or other applicable feature or innovative solution. 
(c)	Plan requirements . 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 21-29(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)	Permits . 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. Designated accelerated permits as mentioned in subsection (b)(7) shall be issued or denied within twenty-five (25) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 21-29(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 21-30(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)	The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1, 5-4-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1, adopted May 4, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 21-31. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)	The city administrator shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)	The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Sec. 21-32. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop-work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one (1) under the provisions of section 21-30(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties . Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Sec. 21-33. - Education and certification. 
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Sec. 21-34. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies . The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within sixty (60) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review . Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Sec. 21-35. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)	Effectivity . This article shall become effective on the first day of January 2011. 
(b)	Severability . If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)	Liability . 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Secs. 21-36—21-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 21-71. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted for the purpose of: 
(1)	Minimizing increases in the peak flow rates of stormwater runoff caused by urban development of water sheds within the city. 
(2)	Establishing procedures through which the purpose can be fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-2, 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-72. - Scope and exclusions. 
(a)	This article shall apply to road construction, commercial, industrial, educational, institutional, and recreational developments of one (1) acre or more; multifamily residential developments of two (2) acres or more; and single-family residential developments of five (5) units and/or five (5) lots or more. 
(b)	If in the developer's judgment, temporary stormwater storage is either unwarranted or impractical, hydrologic and hydraulic computations to support such a conclusion must be furnished to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-3, 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-73. - Administration. 
The city engineer shall administer the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-6(A), 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-74. - Bond provision. 
The city engineer shall have the authority to require a performance bond equal in amount of the work to be performed to insure proper construction of the storm drainage and detention facilities in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-6(B), 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-75. - Permits. 
No building permits shall be issued until a stormwater drainage and detention plan as outlined in this article is approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-6(C), 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-76. - Inspection and right-of-entry. 
The city engineer or his designated representatives may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development and construction. The employees may make inspections of the storm drainage and detention facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements of compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-6(D), 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-77. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city engineer determines that activity on a property does not comply with the approved storm drainage and detention facilities construction plans, he may issue a notice of violation. The notice of violation of the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be to the owner of the property or his agent and shall: 
(1)	Be in writing. 
(2)	Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where such violation has occurred. 
(3)	List the specific requirements of the approved plan which have been violated. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-6(E), 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-78. - Appeals. 
Appeals from decisions of the city engineer relative to this article shall be made to the governing body. Such appeal shall be filed with the city administrator within thirty (30) days of the written decisions of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-6(F), 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-79. - Hydrologic and hydraulic computations. 
(a)	All hydrologic and hydraulic computations utilized in the design of stormwater detention facilities must be prepared by a registered engineer proficient in the field of hydrology and hydraulics and licensed in the state. 
(b)	The required hydrologic and hydraulic computations shall be in accordance with the procedures outlined in the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55 entitled "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," and all subsequent revisions thereto. Other computational procedures may be employed if approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-4, 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-80. - Standards for stormwater detention. 
(a)	The calculated peak rate of stormwater runoff resulting from a twenty-year return frequency twenty-four-hour duration flood shall be no greater after development of the site than that which would result from a twenty-year return frequency twenty-four-hour duration flood on the same site prior to development of the site. 
(b)	Adequate attention must be given to safety and sanitation in the design of any detention facility. Sufficient information shall be shown on the plat to provide for proper construction of the facility. Sufficient design information to show that the facility will operate as required will be provided to the city engineer for review. This shall include the existing or before development peak discharge, the after development peak discharge, and volume of runoff based on the proposed development, as well as all necessary computations used to determine the reduced peak flow. The capacity of the facility shall be sufficient to control the volume of stormwater runoff resulting from a twenty-year frequency twenty-four-hour duration flood within the peak rate of flow requirements stated above. The maintenance of the stormwater detention facilities will be the responsibility of the developer or home association if such organization is created. 
(c)	Adequate erosion and sediment control measures shall be employed during the development's construction phase to insure that the storm drainage and detention facilities perform as designed. 
(Ord. No. 89-01, § 15A-5, 2-6-89) 
Sec. 21-81. - Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM). 
The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM), incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out at length, is adopted as the local drainage design manual for the City of Palmetto. 
( Ord. No. 2015-05, 5-4-2015 ) 
Secs. 21-82—21-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PALMETTO CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER TRIBUTARY PROTECTION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 21-100. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Palmetto Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 99-06, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 21-101. - Statutory authorization. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the requirements of Georgia Code Section 12-5-453. 
(Ord. No. 99-06, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 21-102. - Finding and purposes. 
(a)	Findings. The mayor and council of the city find that: 
(1)	The Chattahoochee River provides multiple public benefits, which include use of the river as the primary water supply for metropolitan Atlanta; 
(2)	The water quality of the Chattahoochee River depends upon the water quality of the flowing streams tributary to the river; 
(3)	Sediment and other polluting materials and conditions, including but not limited to pesticides, nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, toxic materials, and elevations in water temperature are harmful to the water quality of the river and its tributaries; 
(4)	The riparian vegetation along these watercourses helps preserve water quality. Dense tree and understory growth helps to prevent stream bank erosion, and streamside vegetation reduces the amount of sediment and other polluting materials that would otherwise wash into streams. Riparian trees, by shading, help maintain cooler water temperatures and thus enhance water quality. 
(b)	Purposes. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.	Create vegetative buffer areas adjacent to tributary streams in the drainage area; 
2.	Minimize land-disturbing activities within such buffer areas by requiring issuance of a permit for such activities. 
(Ord. No. 99-06, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 21-103. - Definitions. 
Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area , also referred to as the "protection area", means the stream channel and the land area extending outward thirty-five (35) horizontal feet from the banks on either side of all flowing streams in the drainage basin of all tributaries of the Chattahoochee River which enters the Chattahoochee River downstream from Buford Dam and upstream of the southern limits of Douglas County on the west side of the river and the southern limits of Fulton County on the east side of the river, except for such land within the Chattahoochee River Corridor, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-441. 
Flowing stream means any stream which is designated and shown as a permanent stream on the 7.5 minutes quadrangle maps of the U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, plus any stream which the mayor and council of the city may determine to be, and designate as, a flowing stream. 
Land-disturbing activity means scraping, plowing, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, or filling of land or placement of any structure or impervious surface, dam, obstruction or deposit. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown correctly as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, entity or authority and shall include their agents or contractors, the state, its political subdivisions and all its departments, boards, bureaus, commissions, or other agencies. 
Watershed means the land area which drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 99-06, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 21-104. - Establishment of tributary protection area. 
The "Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area" within the city, hereinafter referred to as the "protection area," is hereby established. The designated protection area shall be shown on the official map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-06, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 21-105. - Permit. 
No person shall engage in any land-disturbing activity in a protection area without first having obtained a written permit from the permits clerk of the city. 
(1)	Exceptions. The permit provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to: 
a.	Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. When emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the permits clerk of the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the permits clerk to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability, or water quality of the protection area; 
b.	Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land which is zoned and approved for such use on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article derived (May 3, 1999) or March 1, 1999, whichever is earlier. 
(2)	Application for a permit. A separate application for a permit shall be made to the permits clerk, on a form approved by the permits clerk, for each land-disturbing activity, except that only one (1) application need be made for two (2) or more such acts which are to be done on the same parcel. The application shall include a map of the site and such information concerning the proposed action as the permits clerk deems necessary to describe the nature and extent of the proposed action and to determine the effect of the proposed action on the protection area. 
(3)	Issuance of permit. No application for a permit shall be approved and no permit shall be issued for any land-disturbing activity within the protection area unless: 
a.	The land-disturbing activity is for the purpose of constructing one (1) of the following: a stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or public utility; a dam and/or impoundment; or 
b.	The land-disturbing activity is within a right-of-way of any public agency pursuant to a permit issued by such public agency; or 
c.	The permits clerk finds and determines that a minimum amount of land disturbance necessary for the beneficial use of the parcel has been proposed. 
(4)	Conditions. In each permit issued under the provisions of this article, the permits clerk shall include conditions designed to: 
a.	Limit erosion, sedimentation and water pollution within the protection zone to amounts and rates no greater than those occurring before the land-disturbing activity; and 
b.	Preserve, protect or replace the maximum feasible amount of natural vegetation. 
(5)	Variance. The mayor and council of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for a variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by majority vote of the full membership of the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall give public notice of each such public hearing at least two weeks prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(6)	Responsibility. Neither the issuance of a permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. A permit issued pursuant to this article does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility of securing and complying with any other permit required by any other city ordinance or state law. 
(7)	Term of permit; extension; renewal. The permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time limits specified in the permit, which in no case shall extend more than twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. The permittee shall notify the permits clerk at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the commencement of work. Should the work not be commenced and completed within the time limits, then the permit shall become void; provided, however, that if prior to the date established for commencement of work, the permittee makes written request to the permits clerk for an extension of time to commence the work, setting forth the reasons for the required extension, the permits clerk may grant such extension. A permit which has become void may be renewed at the discretion of the permits clerk. 
(8)	Inspection. The permits clerk may cause inspections of the work to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the permits clerk in making such inspections. The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land-disturbing activities within a protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(9)	Performance bond. Prior to the issuance of any permit for land-disturbing activities within the protection area, the applicant shall submit a performance and maintenance bond which shall ensure that all terms and conditions of the permit are complied with. The bond shall pertain to and recite therein an exact description of the property in question. The length of time for which the bond shall be valid shall be determined by the permits clerk, and shall be specified on the face of the bond. The bond shall be in an amount equal to twice the estimated cost for carrying out the land-disturbing activity in compliance with all terms and conditions of the permit. The sum of the bond shall be made payable to the city. The bond shall be provided by a bonding company licensed and registered in the state. 
(Ord. No. 99-06, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 21-106. - Penalties. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbance permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, that person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit, building permit, or other authorization for the conduct of business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)	Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the permits clerk, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed or the site restored to its original condition or its equivalent. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(c)	Performance bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activity has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the permit and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, his performance bond shall be subject to forfeiture. 
(d)	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the permits clerk upon finding that the holder is in violation of the terms of the permit or any portion of this article. 
(e)	Civil penalties. Any person violating any provision of this article, permitting conditions or stop-work order, and the owner of the land on which the violation occurs, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day and not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-06, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 21-107. - Administrative appeal; Judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative appeal. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the permits clerk shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and council within thirty (30) days after receipt by the permits clerk. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the permits clerk, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 99-06, 5-3-99) 
ARTICLE V. - WATERSHED PROTECTION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, adopted May 6, 2013, repealed former Art. V, §§ 21-121—21-128, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. Former Art. V pertained to Bear Creek Water Supply Watershed Protection, and derived from Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 5-3-2004. 

DIVISION 1. - WATERSHED PROTECTION AREAS 

Sec. 21-121. - In general. 
Watershed protection areas are hereby identified, classified, and regulated for the purpose of insuring the preservation and improvement of water quality and for complying with laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 21-122. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be utilized in the administration of the watershed protection ordinance. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas and other setback areas. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, paved roads, paved driveways, paved parking lots, swimming pools, or patios. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed area which is greater than one hundred (100) square miles as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
Natural buffer means a portion of a parcel which shall be set aside to provide a separation between the use(s) on the parcel and adjoining parcels or uses or a stream through the use of natural vegetation, replanting, and supplemental plantings. Vegetation within a natural buffer area shall not be disturbed except for approved access and utility crossings. For lakes and/or reservoirs, the natural buffer shall be measured from the normal pool elevation. For streams and/or creeks, the natural buffer shall be measured from the stream bank. 
Natural vegetation means an undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprised of indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses and trees. 
Nitrification field means any system for the on-site disposal of wastewater. 
Perennial stream means a stream that has normal stream flow consisting of base flow (discharge that enters the stream channel mainly from groundwater) or both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool elevation level. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed area which is less than one hundred (100) square miles as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
State water means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. For purposes of this article, the city engineer shall make state water determinations. Recorded drainage easements and ditches/swells used for conveying wet weather flows (i.e., no base flow) shall not be considered state waters. 
Stream bank means the confining cut of a stream channel usually identified as the point where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. For non-trout waters, the normal stream flow is any stream flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly after rainfalls or snow melts. 
Tributaries and streams means tributaries and streams, whether named or unnamed, that continuously flow to major water supply streams. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping system, water or sewer pumping station, electric power line, fuel pipe line, telephone line, road, driveway, bridge, river/lake access facility, storm water system and/or railroad. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one (1) or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 21-123. - Grandfathered provisions. 
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)	Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
(2)	Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)	Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
(4)	Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 21-124. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)	Utility lines paralleling the creek provided that: 
a.	The utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas; 
b.	The utilities are located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible; 
c.	The installation and maintenance of the utilities are such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible; and 
d.	The utilities do not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(2)	Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(3)	Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property; provided however, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the (review and permitting authority) on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the (review and permitting authority) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(4)	Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and that are not incidental to other land development activity provided that: 
a.	The activity is consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture; and 
b.	The activity does not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(5)	Mining activities are subject to prior approval by the department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
(6)	Land subject to a perpetual conservation easement at least as restrictive as the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 21-125. - Application to watersheds. 
The following large and small water supply watersheds, designated major water supply streams, named tributaries, minor unnamed streams, and state waters located in and out of the large and small water supply watersheds shall be governed by this article: 
(1)	Large water supply watersheds: Chattahoochee River Basin. 
(2)	Small water supply watersheds: 
a.	Bear Creek Basin. 
b.	Cedar Creek. 
(3)	Designated major water supply streams : 
a.	Bear Creek. 
b.	Chattahoochee River. 
c.	Cedar Creek. 
(4)	Tributaries to water supply streams: 
a.	Bear Creek. 
b.	Little Bear Creek. 
c.	Cedar Branch. 
d.	Browns Creek. 
e.	Hood Branch. 
f.	Panther Creek. 
g.	Alexander Creek. 
(5)	Any and all minor unnamed streams which are indicated as perennial on the 1963 (photo revised 1982) U.S.G.S. quad sheets. 
(6)	State waters. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
DIVISION 3. - RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 21-126. - Large water supply watersheds. 
(a)	The corridors of all perennial streams in a large water supply watersheds tributary to a governmentally owned public drinking water supply reservoir within a seven-mile radius of the reservoir boundary are protected by the following criteria: 
(1)	A natural vegetated buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred (100) feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. No chemical treatment such as herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers or paint is permitted within the natural vegetated buffer. 
(2)	Vegetation within a natural buffer area shall not be disturbed except for approved access and utility crossings. 
(3)	No impervious surface shall be constructed within a one hundred fifty-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(4)	Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within a one hundred fifty-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(5)	No sewage treatment facility, dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other harmful products is allowed onto the land within the natural buffer. 
(6)	Pervious hiking trails and picnic areas will be allowed within the natural buffer and setback. Any land disturbance activities are subject to the approval of Palmetto. 
(b)	The following restrictions shall apply specifically to large water supply watersheds as identified in the article: 
(1)	New facilities located within seven (7) miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) in amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds on any one (1) day or more, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or requirements of the Standard Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 21-127. - Small water supply watershed. 
(a)	The perennial stream corridors of a small water supply watershed within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
(1)	Minimum natural buffer—One hundred fifty (150) feet as measured from the normal pool elevation or the natural buffer shall be considered the one hundred-year flood plain elevation, whichever is greater. 
(2)	Minimum setback for all structures, nitrification fields, and impervious surfaces—One hundred fifty (150) feet as measured from the normal pool elevation of a reservoir. 
(3)	A natural buffer shall be maintained of a distance of one hundred (100) feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. No chemical treatment such as herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers or paint is permitted within the natural vegetated buffer. 
(4)	Vegetation within a natural buffer area shall not be disturbed except for approved access and utility crossings. 
(5)	No impervious surface shall be constructed within a one hundred fifty-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(6)	Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the setback area of subsection (a)(3) above. 
(7)	No sewage treatment facility, dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other harmful products is allowed onto the land within the natural buffer. 
(8)	Pervious hiking trails and picnic areas will be allowed within the natural buffer and setback. Any land disturbance activities are subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b)	The perennial stream corridors within a small water supply watersheds and outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
(1)	A natural buffer shall be maintained for a distance of fifty (50) feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(2)	Vegetation within a natural buffer area shall not be disturbed except for approved access and utility crossings. 
(3)	No impervious surface shall be constructed within a seventy-five-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(4)	Septic tanks and septic tanks drainfields are prohibited in the seventy-five-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(5)	No sewage treatment facility, dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other harmful products is allowed onto the land within the natural buffer. 
(6)	Pervious hiking trails and picnic areas will be allowed within the natural buffer and setback. Any land disturbance activities are subject to the approval of the city council. 
(c)	The following criteria apply at all locations in a small water supply watershed: 
(1)	New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)	New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(3)	The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(4)	Facilities located within seven (7) miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) in amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds on any one (1) day or more, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or requirements of the Standard Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 21-128. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Any person in violation of any provision of this article shall be served written notice by the city stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Such person shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, take all necessary action to correct the violation and shall permanently cease such violation. 
(b)	When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure and be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation for each day that the violation exists. 
(c)	When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours, restore vegetation, and be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation for each day that the violation exists. 
(d)	The city may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Secs. 21-129—21-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 21-176. - Short title. 
This article will be known as the City of Palmetto Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-177. - Statutory authorization. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the requirements of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-178. - General provisions. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)	Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)	Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)	To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)	Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate area of the city. 
(c)	Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)	Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)	Responsibility for administration. The city administrator shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-179. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Accidental discharge. A discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City separate storm sewer system. Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, junction boxes, headwalls, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)	Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)	Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)	Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity. Activities subject to the city Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection. Either of the following: 
(1)	Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)	Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 21-180 of this article. 
Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, § 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge permit. A permit issued by the state environmental protection division (EPD) under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person. Except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, mayor and council, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution. The contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control. A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-180. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)	Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)	Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and any other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)	The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)	Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)	This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)	A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)	Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city or, if applicable, the appropriate county jurisdiction. 
(4)	Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-181. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-182. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)	If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)	The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access during the property's and/or facility's normal operating hours to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)	The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)	The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)	Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a property and/or facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)	If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-183. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person, by phone, or by facsimile no later than 24 hours subsequent to the acquisition of knowledge or suspicion of a release, of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-184. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)	Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section 21-184(e). 
(b)	Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)	The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.	The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.	The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.	A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)	Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.	The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.	The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.	That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.	The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.	Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.	The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)	Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city administrator. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city mayor and council shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(d)	Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of the decision of the mayor and council upholding the decision of the city administrator, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)	Costs of abatement of the violation. Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within fifteen (15) days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)	Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in city court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)	Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)	Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. 
The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Secs. 21-185—21-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER RUNOFF 

Sec. 21-201. - Short title. 
This article will be known as the Palmetto Post-Development Stormwater Runoff Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-202. - Statutory authorization. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the requirements of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-203. - General provisions. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)	Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)	Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)	Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)	Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)	Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the city's greenspace plans; 
(6)	Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)	Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)	Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (2) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)	New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one (1) acre or more; 
(2)	Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; 
(3)	Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)	Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (1) and (2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(5)	The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.	Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.	Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.	Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
d.	Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city. 
(c)	Designation of ordinance administrator. The city administrator or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)	Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)	Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(f)	Stormwater design manual. The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda (or equivalent local stormwater management design manual), for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-204. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Applicant. A person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement. An agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention. The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility. A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer. A person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development. A land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement. An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan. A plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention. The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection. Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
Flooding. A volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space. Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot. An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG). A natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover. A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development. Any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities. Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project. A discrete land development undertaking. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement. A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
New development. A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution. A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice. Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility. A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility. A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection. Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner. The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit. The permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person. Means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development. Refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development. Refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project. A land development project. 
Redevelopment. A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility. Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff. Stormwater runoff. 
Site. The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design. Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility. Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure. Any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan. A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system. The entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit. A stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff. The flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control. A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision. When used as a verb, the division or redivision of a lot, of a tract or parcel of land, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land. The term "subdivision" shall mean the act or process of dividing property. When used as a noun, where appropriate to context, the term "subdivision" also may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots in common ownership at the time of division. The following properties however, shall not, for purposes of this article, be deemed subdivisions: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots of record, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots of record are in compliance with the zoning ordinance; 
(2)	Division of land into parcels having five (5) or more acres where no new street or roadway is involved; 
(3)	Division of land into two (2) or fewer lots provided: 
a.	Each lot abuts an existing public street; 
b.	No alteration of existing utility installations is involved; and 
c.	The planning commission is notified of such division through a plat and executes a formal release of the property for recording and development purposes. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-205. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)	Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by and/or acceptable to the city for that purpose. 
The city will allow for an acceleration of the permitting process if the permit applicant attends a stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting as contained in section 21-30(7)(a) and the project meets one or more of the following criteria in addition: 
(1)	The site to be developed is a redevelopment site that was considered a brownfield or greyfield (commercial redevelopment) type site. 
(2)	The proposed site plan incorporates low impact development or green infrastructure features such as bioretention areas, rain gardens, rain water harvesting, green roofs, vegetated swales, re-vegetating stream buffers, porous pavement or other applicable feature or innovative solution. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)	Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (b); 
(2)	Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (c), if applicable; 
(3)	Performance bond in accordance with subsection (d), if applicable; and, 
(4)	Permit application and application review fees in accordance with subsection (e). 
(b)	Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in this section. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)	Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)	Vicinity map. 
(3)	Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)	Post-development hydrologic analysis . The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 21-206; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 21-206 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)	Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 21-206; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; low impact or green infrastructure design solutions; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace plans. 
(6)	Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)	Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the city Soil and Erosion Control Ordinance and NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)	Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. Sites that exceed required open space requirements may be eligible for bonus density credits. Certain low impact or green infrastructure design features incorporated into the plan such as bioretention, vegetated swales or green roofs may be counted by the city towards open space credit per approval by the city administrator or his or her designee. 
(9)	Low impact design (LID) management system (if such features are included). A description and drawings of all components of the proposed LID management system including: 
a.	Locations, cross sections and profiles of all creeks, streams, drainage swales and their method of stabilization; 
b.	All measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water; 
c.	Description of non-structural BMP's; 
d.	All measures for the protection of water quality; 
e.	The structural details for all components of the proposed drainage systems and LID management facilities; 
f.	Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction specifications and expected hydrology with supporting calculations; 
g.	Proposed site plan including location of buildings or other structures, impervious surfaces and drainage facilities, if applicable. 
h.	Soils information from test pits performed at the location of proposed LID management facilities, including, but not limited to, soil descriptions, depth to seasonal high groundwater, depth to bedrock and percolations rates. Soils information will be based on site test pits logged by a Georgia registered soil scientist or a Georgia registered professional engineer. 
i.	Landscaping plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used within and adjacent to the stormwater practice. 
(10)	Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(11)	Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(12)	Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in subsection (c), the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with subsection (c). 
(13)	Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(14)	Estimate of plan annual maintenance costs. For projects requiring a stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement, the applicant must provide an estimate of the annual maintenance costs of the stormwater management system defined in the stormwater management plan. Sufficient detail must be provided to allow the city to have reasonable confidence that the estimate is a realistic statement of probable costs. 
(c)	Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 21-208 of this article. 
The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(d)	Performance and maintenance bonds. After the acceptance of a final plat for a development and prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for a development, the owner shall provide the city a performance maintenance bond to assure the faithful performance of all maintenance defined by the approved stormwater management plan. The term of the bond shall be five (5) years from the date the bond is accepted by the city. The amount of the bond shall be not less than the estimate of annual maintenance costs provided as a part of the stormwater management plan application. 
The bond is to be payable to the city, be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state and be acceptable to the mayor and council for the city. 
The city may accept, in lieu of a performance maintenance bond as set forth in this section, a letter of credit issued from a bank located within the metropolitan Atlanta area and licensed to do business in the state. The term and amount of the letter of credit shall be the same as a performance maintenance bond. The letter of credit shall be payable to the city. 
(e)	Application procedure. 
(1)	Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city. 
(2)	Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 21-205(a) above (three (3) copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)	The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, are approved or disapproved within thirty (30) days of city receipt of the application. Designated accelerated permits as mentioned in section 21-30(7) shall be issued or denied within twenty-five (25) days after city receipt of the application. 
(4)	If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (e)(3) above and this subparagraph above shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)	Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)	Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.	The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.	The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.	The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.	No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
e.	Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 21-207(b). 
(f)	Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(g)	Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)	Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)	Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)	Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)	Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)	Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 2, 5-4-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 2, adopted May 4, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 21-206. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)	Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.	It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.	Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.	Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)	Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.	Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.	Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.	Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)	Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm under subsection (b) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the twenty-five-year return frequency storm event must be provided. This requirement shall not apply if a post-development downstream analysis of the site is both acceptable to the city and shows that uncontrolled post development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or the analysis, being acceptable to the city, shows that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(4)	Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. This requirement shall not apply if a post-development downstream analysis of the site is both acceptable to the city and shows that uncontrolled post development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or the analysis, being acceptable to the city, shows that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(5)	Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)	Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 21-206(a). The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)	Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, flared end sections, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one (1) parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.	Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.	All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.	Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)	Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-207. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)	Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted and certified by a state-licensed professional engineer who has been approved by the city and is retained and paid by the applicant. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports, made available to the city when requested, that contain the following information: 
(1)	The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)	Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)	Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)	Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. In addition to the inspections conducted by the applicant's engineer, the city may conduct periodic inspections to determine compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(b)	Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after each phase of construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-208. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)	Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by forwarding a notice via registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, may correct the violation as provided in section 21-208(d) hereof. 
Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)	Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide that the city may enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and a right to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)	Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(d)	Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after thirty (30) days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-209. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)	Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article. The city shall state a date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)	Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
a.	Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures described in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures described in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures described in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.	Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures described in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in city court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Secs. 21-210—21-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 21-226. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Palmetto Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-227. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)	Findings. Whereas, the mayor and council of the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)	Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)	Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)	Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)	Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)	Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)	Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)	Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)	Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)	Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)	Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)	Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace 
(b)	Purposes. It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)	Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-228. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 21-230(a)(1) of this article), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to cleaning, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilities or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 21-230(a)(2) of this article, extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)	The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)	A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or 
(3)	Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-229. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 21-228 of this article. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law. Approval or exemption from these requirements does not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)	Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.	Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
b.	Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.	Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
d.	Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this article. 
(2)	Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.	Activities for the purpose of building one (1) of the following: 
1.	A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.	Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.	Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.	Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.	Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.	Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.	Public sewer line easement paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in section 21-229(2)a., above. 
c.	Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or are approved under the terms of this article. 
d.	Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.	Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as my be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.	Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 21-230(b) below. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-230. - Land development requirements. 
(a)	Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)	An additional setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)	No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)	Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the mayor and council of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variances require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)	Except as provided above, the mayor and council of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the mayor and council. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.	When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevent land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.	Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)	At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.	A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.	A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.	A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated. 
d.	Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.	At least one (1) alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible. 
f.	A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.	A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.	Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)	The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.	The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.	The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.	The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
d.	Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.	The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.	Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment as denial of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-231. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-232. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)	A site plan showing: 
a.	The location of all streams on the property; 
b.	Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.	Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five (5)-foot contour intervals; 
d.	Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone, and 
e.	Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)	A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)	Any other documentation that the city may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-233. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-234. - Inspection. 
The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course of the work and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at any reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sties of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while said party is in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-235. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)	Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible party; 
b.	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan and/or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
f.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)	Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
a.	Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measure set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.	Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Sec. 21-236. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, may appeal in writing within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of such decision or order to the city administrator and shall be entitled to an additional hearing before the mayor and council of the city for reconsideration within sixty (60) days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton or Coweta, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-3-04) 
Chapter 22 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power relative to streets generally, § 35.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Encroachments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any fence, railing, platform steps, hedge, portico or other obstruction beyond the limits of his lot within the city, and thus encroach upon the street, alley, sidewalk or other public way of the city. In case any person has erected any such obstruction, he shall be notified by the chief of police to remove the same; and upon failure to comply with the notice within twenty-four (24) hours after such notice, the chief of police shall have the same removed. The cost of removal and disposal of such encroachment shall be a charge against the owner, and a lien on his lot adjacent to such obstruction. 
(Code 1977, § 15-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, in or on any of the streets, sidewalks or other public ways of the city, any obstruction of any kind or character whatsoever except by special written permit of the governing body. 
(Code 1977, § 15-2) 
Sec. 22-3. - Washing off loose dirt. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to allow loose dirt in quantities of the equivalent of one (1) square foot or more to escape from private property, with water as the carrier, onto a sidewalk, street or other public way within a single twenty-four-hour period. 
(Code 1977, § 15-3) 
Sec. 22-4. - Burning of materials. 
It shall be unlawful to burn any substance or thing upon the concrete or asphalt of any public street or other public way within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15-4) 
Secs. 22-5—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-26. - Approval required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any improvements in or upon any public street, public alley, public sidewalk or other public place in the city, either by grading, paving, paving foundation, curbing or guttering or otherwise, without the consent of the city through its governing body, upon and after written application by and on the part of such person. 
(Code 1977, § 15-20) 
Secs. 22-27—22-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SIDEWALK PAVING PETITIONS 

Sec. 22-41. - Reservations. 
The city reserves the right to accept or reject any petition brought under this division. The city further reserves all rights presently within its power and under its charter. The city expressly reserves the right to install sidewalks without the necessity of compliance with this division. 
(Code 1977, § 15-23) 
Sec. 22-42. - Purpose. 
This division is enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose, among others, of promoting the general welfare and health of the city, to establish a reasonable method of financing sidewalk paving, and to include participation of property owners within such financing method. 
(Code 1977, § 15-21) 
Sec. 22-43. - Petition. 
Property owners shall have the right to petition the city for the paving of sidewalks therein. Such petition shall be submitted to the governing body upon forms approved by it for this purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 15-22(a)) 
Sec. 22-44. - Percentage requirements. 
Before any petition brought under this division can be acted upon, the petition must be signed by sixty (60) percent or more of the property owners of the area for which sidewalk paving is requested. Such property owners, in addition to constituting sixty (60) percent or more in numbers, shall be required to own sixty (60) percent or more of the property, as determined by front footage, of the property for which sidewalk paving is requested. 
(Code 1977, § 15-22(b)) 
Sec. 22-45. - Participation. 
In the event a petition for sidewalk paving is brought, and is accepted by the city, the property owners shall be assessed twenty-five (25) percent of the costs thereof and the city shall pay the remaining seventy-five (75) percent. Such costs to the property owners shall be apportioned in accordance with the front footage owned by the property owners, and shall be paid within one (1) year after the completion of the paving. 
(Code 1977, § 15-22(c)) 
Sec. 22-46. - Single-side paving. 
Each petition submitted under this division shall clearly state which side of the street shall be paved in the event the city determines only one (1) side is to be paved. The city shall have the option to pave only one (1) side of the street with a sidewalk. The petitioners shall have the option to determine which side, in that event, shall be paved with a sidewalk. This determination shall be included within the petition. Property owners on both sides of a street shall be assessed upon the basis of their front footage even though a sidewalk is placed upon one (1) side of the street only. 
(Code 1977, § 15-22(d)) 
Sec. 22-47. - Area of petition. 
A petition for sidewalk paving may be submitted for no less an area than one (1) block. Property owners on both sides of the street shall be considered when determining the area of the petition. Intersecting streets upon the opposite side of the street shall not be included. 
(Code 1977, § 15-22(e)) 
Secs. 22-48—22-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND PICKETS 

Sec. 22-66. - Parade permit. 
(a)	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, conduct or accompany any organized parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property in the city unless an application has been previously filed and a permit granted to conduct such parade within the city. 
(b)	Application for permit. An application for permit to conduct or sponsor a parade shall be filed with the chief of police in writing and shall contain the following information furnished by the person in official charge of the proposed parade: 
(1)	The name of all organizations or persons organizing or sponsoring the parade. 
(2)	The purpose of the parade. 
(3)	The date and hours of the parade. 
(4)	The proposed route of the parade, and its beginning and terminating points. 
(5)	The number and type of vehicles, marching units and floats. 
(6)	The number of persons participating in the parade. 
(c)	Investigation. The chief of police shall investigate all applications for parade permits, and shall issue permits where the information specified in subsection (b) has been furnished, provided the proposed parade is otherwise lawful and can be held without undue interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the city, of which circumstances the chief of police shall exercise his discretion. 
(Code 1977, § 12-11) 
Sec. 22-67. - Assembly permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a congregation of people at any public place within the city, unless a permit therefor shall have first been obtained from the chief of police. The standards for issuance of a parade permit apply to the issuance of a permit under this section. 
(Code 1977, § 12-12) 
Sec. 22-68. - Picketing regulated. 
Persons engaged in peaceful picketing shall observe the following: 
(1)	No picketing shall be permitted upon any street or other way designed primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(2)	Persons engaged in peaceful picketing shall remain on the outer limits of any sidewalk being used for the purpose, i.e., upon the side nearest the street, and shall keep moving at all times. 
(3)	No person, while picketing, shall impede or hinder pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon any sidewalk, street or public way. 
(4)	Persons engaged in picketing shall maintain a distance of ten (10) feet from each other, and shall at no time prevent free and unimpeded movement of invitees and owners onto and away from any private property, or any person onto and away from any public property. 
(5)	It shall be unlawful to picket between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(6)	No person, while picketing, shall carry or display any sign, symbol or other article which tends to cause or contribute to a breach of the peace, or which tends to cause a riot. 
(Code 1977, § 12-13) 
Secs. 22-69—22-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY 
DIVISION 1. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE; SCOPE; DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 22-80. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Palmetto (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including, but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-81. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-82. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Palmetto, Georgia. 
City administrator means the City Administrator of the City of Palmetto, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Codified ordinances means the Code of the City of Palmetto, Georgia. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, to dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one (1) of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than fifty (50) percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than fifty (50) percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 22-83. - Registration required. 
Each utility that occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-84. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner. 
(2)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. 
(3)	A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-85. - Incomplete registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the city administrator shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. if a registration is complete, the city administrator shall so notify the utility in writing. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-86. - Acceptance of registration. 
Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-87. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one (1) year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance, taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way, prosecuting the violator, and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 

Sec. 22-88. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the city in accordance with the terms of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-89. - Permit procedure. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the city administrator, or his or her designee, upon application made on forms prescribed by the city. the written application shall include the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the utility. 
(2)	The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed, their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway, and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation. 
(3)	The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work. 
(4)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s). 
(5)	The projected dates for the work to be started and finished. 
(6)	An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. 
(7)	A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(8)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-90. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the city administrator, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the city administrator and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-91. - Issuance of permit. 
If the city administrator determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the city administrator may issue a permit: 
(1)	Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; 
(2)	Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)	Whether the approval will negatively impact safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and whether the project, construction or maintenance will require unreasonably difficulty or involve an unreasonable length of time. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-92. - Emergency situations. 
(a)	Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the city administrator of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)	In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-93. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)	Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)	The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The city administrator may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)	Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)	Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)	Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)	Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-94. - Cancellation for cause. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within twenty (20) working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the city administrator decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)	The city shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)	If the utility fails to cure within fifteen (15) calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-95. - Expiration of permit. 
If work is not begun within six (6) months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 22-96. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the city administrator or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Palmetto municipal equivalents. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-97. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically authorized in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-98. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the city and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-99. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-100. - Blasting or excavating. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given forty-eight (48) hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
DIVISION 5. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-101. - Repair of facilities and adjoining property. 
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-102. - Liability for cost to repair. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after twenty (20) working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 22-103. - Inspections. 
The utility shall make the construction site available to the city administrator and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-104. - Cessation of work. 
At any time, including the time of inspection, the city administrator may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-105. - Completion of construction. 
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
DIVISION 7. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 22-106. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. in addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 22-92 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 22-107. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
DIVISION 9. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 22-108. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-109. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city, by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the constitution and laws of the united states, State of Georgia and the city charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-110. - Compliance. 
No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 4-4-2016) 
Chapter 23 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire lanes, § 9-21 et seq.; parades, processions and pickets, § 22-66 et seq.; abandoned or junked motorized vehicles, § 24-157. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Statutes adopted. 
Pursuant to chapter 6 of title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Code Sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, title 40, chapter 6 [O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.] (all known as the Uniform Rules of the Road) and the definitions contained in Code Section 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1977, § 16-1) 
Sec. 23-2. - Temporary regulations. 
The chief of police may establish temporary traffic regulations which the public must obey after being warned. Verbal warning by an authorized police officer of the city, or by printed signs erected in the area affected, shall constitute sufficient notice to the public of such temporary traffic regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 16-4) 
Sec. 23-3. - Failure to have vehicle under control. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate that vehicle in such a manner so as to collide with any object legally placed upon or adjacent to any street or highway nor shall a driver operate a vehicle so that such vehicle leaves or enters any street or highway except at an intersection or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 16-30, 5-14-85) 
Sec. 23-4. - Collision with a parked vehicle. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate that vehicle in a manner so as to collide with a parked vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, § 16-29, 5-14-85) 
Sec. 23-5. - Not to impede traffic; minimum. 
No person shall retard or impede traffic between street intersections. 
(Code 1977, § 16-3) 
Sec. 23-6. - Blocking railroad grade crossings. 
It shall be unlawful to block a railroad crossing for more than five (5) minutes. 
(Code 1977, § 16-12) 
Sec. 23-7. - Truck routes—Definition of truck; use of truck routes required; exceptions. 
(a)	For purposes of this section, a "truck" is defined as any motor vehicle having more than two (2) axles; provided, however, that the restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to the following motor vehicles which may have more than two (2) axles: 
(1)	Recreational vehicles; 
(2)	Municipal emergency vehicles; 
(3)	Municipal service vehicles; or 
(4)	Buses. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for a person or corporation to operate or park a truck on any street, road, drive or avenue in Palmetto which is not designated as a truck route in section 23-8 of this article, except under the following circumstances: 
(1)	Any truck may travel via the most direct route possible from a truck route location in the city for the exclusive purpose of local pick up, delivery, repair, or other necessary business, subject to verification of such purpose by destination papers. 
(2)	Any truck owned or operated by a business may travel the most direct route possible from a truck route to the place of said business in the city, provided that this exception shall not apply in cases where businesses are located in districts zoned for residential use. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 3-6-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 1, adopted Mar. 6, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 23-8. - Truck routes designated. 
The city streets, roads, drives and/or avenues, or portions thereof, as designated below, shall constitute the exclusive truck routes in Palmetto: 
(1)	Roosevelt Highway (U.S. Highway 29) from the northern limits of the city to the southern limits of the city; 
(2)	Cascade Palmetto Highway (State Route 154) from Roosevelt Highway (U.S. Highway 29) to the northern limits of the city; and 
(3)	Weldon Road from Palmetto Tyrone Road to Roosevelt Highway (U.S. Highway 29). 
These designated routes shall be shown on a map entitled "Official Truck Route Map—City of Palmetto, Georgia." This map is hereby made a part of this section. The city clerk shall retain a copy of the map and all amendments thereto. 
( Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2, 3-6-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 2, adopted Mar. 6, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Authority to establish truck routes, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(13). 
Sec. 23-9. - Bicycles, skateboards, etc., prohibited on certain sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or other such vehicle or apparatus upon the sidewalks of the business section of the city along U.S. Highway 29 beginning at a point where Church Street intersects U.S. Highway 29 and ending at a point where Menneffee Street intersects U.S. Highway 29. 
(Code 1977, § 15-5) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate toy vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(18). 
Sec. 23-10. - Shrubbery, other hazards at street corners; duty of property owner. 
It shall be the duty of every property owner to keep weeds on their respective lots, as well as shrubbery thereon, in such condition as not to create traffic hazards at street corners. Shrubbery, vines, trees or other things which would obstruct the view of a person passing a street corner or street intersection shall be kept in such condition as not to obstruct the view of motorists using the streets. 
(Code 1977, § 16-14) 
Sec. 23-11. - Railroad trains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a railroad train or locomotive within the city at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Code 1977, § 16-5) 
Secs. 23-12—23-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-13, adopted Jan. 7, 1991, repealed former Art. II, §§ 23-36—23-43, and added a new Art. II, § 23-36, in lieu thereof. Former Art. II pertained to stopping, standing and parking and originated from the 1977 Code, §§ 16-20—16-27. 
Cross reference— Fire lanes, § 9-21 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 23-36. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones; signs; traffic-control devices; schedule 
(a)	Designation; maintenance. The police chief or his designee, upon approval by resolution of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)	Speed zones; 
(2)	Truck zones and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)	One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)	Freight-loading zones and regulations; 
(5)	Parking and no-parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(6)	Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; 
(7)	Stop signals and other traffic signals; and 
(8)	No-passing zones. 
(b)	Written orders. The police chief or his designee is authorized to issue written orders designated by appropriate traffic-control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)	Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)	Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)	Traffic lanes; and 
(4)	Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)	Schedule. The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which records shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (a) above, this schedule and any amendments thereto shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the mayor and council; and this schedule is hereby incorporated herein, and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)	Specifications. All traffic-control signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic-control devices of the city. 
(e)	Violations. Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or any other traffic-control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-13, 1-7-91) 
Secs. 23-37—23-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES III—X. - RESERVED 

Secs. 23-66—23-200. - Reserved. 
Chapter 23.5 - TREE PROTECTION AND LANDSCAPING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23.5-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter has been developed to benefit the environmental and aesthetic quality of the city. The intent is to create an opportunity for and to promote the protection of the city's natural resources and promote growth in a way that will provide a healthy environment for the city's future. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the protection of trees as part of the land development process; to prevent massive grading of land, both developed and undeveloped, without provision for replacement of trees; to protect trees during construction whenever possible; and to provide standards for existing residential and commercial property in order to enhance the quality of life within the city. 
It shall be the duty of the city administrator or his/her designee to enforce the provisions and requirements of this chapter. The city administrator or his/her designee shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any land disturbance permit and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or a portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjoining land, lot, or parcel. A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. 
Aesthetic. The perception of artistic elements or elements in the natural or created environment that is pleasing to the eye. 
Amenities. A natural or created feature that enhances the aesthetic quality, visual appeal, or makes more attractive or satisfying a particular property, place, or area. 
Buffer: 
(1)	Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, light, or other environmental nuisance; 
(2)	An area along some natural feature designated to protect and/or preserve the essential character of such feature and allow it to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition; 
(3)	A natural undisturbed portion of a lot, except for approved access and utility crossings, which is set aside to achieve a visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and/or uses; this includes land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance, to shield or block noise, light, glare, visual, or other conditions, to block physical passage to non-similar areas, or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. Clearing of undergrowth from a buffer is prohibited. Also "buffer area" or "buffer strip." 
Caliper. A measure of the diameter of a tree trunk for the purpose of size grading or classification. The caliper of the trunk is measured six (6) inches above the ground, up to and including four-inch caliper size, and at diameter breast height (dbh) when the trunk is larger than four (4) inches. 
City. The City of Palmetto, Georgia. 
City administrator or his/her designee. The city administrator or his/her designee is the agent for the City of Palmetto having the primary responsibilities of administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Clearing. The removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
Clear-cutting. The indiscriminate and broad removal of trees, shrubs, or undergrowth. This definition shall not include the selective removal of non-native tree and shrub species when the soil is left relatively undisturbed; removal of dead trees; or normal mowing operations. See also "clearing." 
Critical root zone (CRZ). The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone is approximately one (1) foot of radial distance for every inch of tree's DBH, with a minimum of eight (8) feet. 
Cut: 
(1)	A portion of land surface or area from which soil, earth, rock, or other materials has been removed or will be removed by excavation; 
(2)	The height below original ground surface after the material has been or will be removed. 
DBH (diameter-at-breast-height). is the trunk diameter (in inches) at a height of four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground. If a tree has multiple trunks below four and one-half (4½) feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Deciduous. Plants that annually lose their leaves. 
Development. All structures and other modifications of the natural landscape above and below ground or water, on a particular site, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations. 
Drip line. A vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree's branch tips to the ground. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Evergreen. Plants that retain foliage throughout the year. 
EDF (existing density factor). The tree density units awarded for the protection of existing trees which will remain on site to be protected during construction. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground; the height above original ground surface after the material has been or will be added. 
Grade, existing. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Grade, finished. The final grade or elevation of the ground surface after cutting or filling and conforming to a proposed and approved design. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this shall include stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or a combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Grubbing. The removal of stumps or roots from a site. 
Land clearance. Removal of trees and/or vegetation from the land surface. 
Land disturbance activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state and local waters or onto lands within the state, including but not limited to clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, or filling of land but not including agricultural practices such as a family vegetable plot or forestry which is defined by law as a non-land disturbing activity. 
LDP (land disturbance permit). Any permit other than a building permit issued by the city that authorizes clearing, grubbing, excavating, filling, grading or other land disturbance activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be clearing, clearing and grubbing or development permit as defined and authorized under the development regulations of the city. 
Landscape plan. A planting plan for a development, required by this chapter. 
Landscape strip . Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are allowed. 
Landscaping: 
(1)	An expanse of natural scenery; or 
(2)	Any combination of natural and man-planted and maintained features including lawns, trees, shrubs, other plants, decorative or natural ground cover, exposed rock, mulch, wood chips, water features, sculpture, paths, etc. 
Natural features. Trees or other living vegetation, and rocks. 
RDF (replacement density factor). The minimum number of tree density units which must be achieved on a property after subtracting tree density units for existing trees (EDF) which will remain on site and be protected during construction. 
Screening. The method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting land use from another. 
Sediment. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity; the product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Shrub. A woody plant, either, evergreen or deciduous, with a mature height usually less than ten (10) feet. 
Site: 
(1)	Any tract, lot, or parcel of land in combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land which are in one (1) ownership or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project; 
(2)	All contiguous land and bodies of water in one (1) ownership, graded or proposed for grading or development as a unit, although not necessarily at one time; 
(3)	Regarding historic properties, a site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
SDF (site density factor). The minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property after development (e.g., twelve (12) units per acre, exclusive of any acreage within a zoning buffer and any trees required to be preserved or planted in a zoning buffer). 
Site plan. A document or group of documents containing sketches, text, drawings, maps, photographs, and other material intended to present and explain certain elements of a proposed development, including physical design, siting of buildings and structures, interior vehicular and pedestrian access, the provision of improvements, and the interrelationship of these elements. 
Specimen tree. Any tree which qualifies for special consideration for protection due to its size, species or historic relevance. Further defined at section 23.5-26. 
Stripping. See "Grubbing." 
Timber harvesting. The act of removing harvestable trees and wooded areas which qualify as forestry land management practices or agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17, as amended, on tracts of land zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purposes. 
Topography. The configuration of surface features of a region, including its relief and rivers, lakes, and showing relative elevations. 
Tract. An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the subject of a development application. 
Tree. Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant. 
Tree, overstory. Trees that will generally reach a mature height of greater than forty (40) feet. 
Tree, understory. Trees that will generally reach a mature height of less than forty (40) feet. 
Tree density standard. The minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property after development. 
Tree diameter. See DBH; see Caliper. 
Tree protection area. Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be retained in order to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The tree protection area shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the dripline of the tree plus any additional area encompassing the critical root zone of a tree or group of trees collectively. 
Tree protection plan. A plan that identifies tree protection areas, existing trees to be retained and proposed trees to be planted on a property to meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree removal. Any act which causes a tree to die within two years after commission of the act, including but not limited to damage inflicted upon the CRZ or trunk as a result of: 
(1)	The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
(2)	The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
(3)	Soil compaction; 
(4)	Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the tree's root system with more than four inches of soil; 
(5)	Pruning not in accordance with the standards set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA); 
(6)	Paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; and 
(7)	Application of herbicides or defoliates to any trees without first obtaining a permit. 
Tree save area. See Tree Protection Area. 
Tree thinning. Selective cutting or thinning of trees for the clear purpose of good forestry management in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be construed as clear cutting. 
Weeds. Any undesired, uncultivated plant. Especially one growing in profusion, so as to crowd out a desired crop, disfigure a lawn, etc. For the purposes of this article, weeds shall also include grass and/or underbrush in non-agriculturally used property, which is at least twelve (12) inches tall. 
Zoning buffer. A buffer, as defined in and required by the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special exception, or variance approval for a specific property. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-3. - Applicability. 
(a)	The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing residential and commercial property (see section 23.5-3) and to all activity which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit on any real property within the city (see section 23.5-2). No clearing, grubbing, grading, or other removal of existing vegetation that may effect the health of existing tree coverage may occur until it is determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable city codes and regulations. 
(b)	Exemptions from the provisions of this article include the following project types: 
(1)	Grandfathered projects. Any property included within the limits of a LDP (Land Disturbance Permit) approved prior to the effective date of this chapter, any remaining portion of a project where seventy-five (75) percent of the area has already been included in a LDP's approval prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(2)	Horticultural or agricultural operations. Land clearing for clearly agricultural purposes, including timber harvesting operations which qualify as forestry land management practices or agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17, as amended, on land zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purposes; plant or tree nurseries; orchards, are exempt. 
This exemption shall not include tree harvesting incidental to the development of land, or tree harvesting on land that is anticipated to be developed for non horticultural uses. Further, the operation of timber harvesting shall provide a fifty-foot undisturbed buffer measured from the right-of-way, provided and maintained along all road frontages, during the land disturbance activity, except for authorized access crossings to ensure the efficient operation of the city's street system and to protect the health and general welfare of persons using the city's street system. No timber harvesting shall be undertaken on any parcel of land unless the transitional buffer zones required by the zoning regulations of the district in which the property is located, are preserved in a natural and undisturbed state. 
This chapter only regulates timber harvesting where such harvesting is incidental to development or tree harvesting on land that is anticipated to be developed for non horticultural uses and recognizes the preemptive power of the State of Georgia with the regulation of legitimate timber harvesting as defined in this chapter. 
(3)	The removal of diseased or infested trees. Removal upon advice and written finding of the county extension service, Georgia Forestry Commission, a certified arborist, or state registered urban forester. 
The requirements of this chapter apply to each zoning classification. Any requirement can be applied or removed through conditions of zoning (see Code of the City of Palmetto, Appendix B, Zoning, Article XVII Residential Architectural Design Standards and Landscaping Requirements, sections 17-5, -10, -11, -12). 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-4. - Timber harvesting notice. 
Any persons or firms performing timber harvesting operations in any incorporated area of the city for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside the State of Georgia shall provide notice of such harvesting operations (O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24) to the city administrator or his/her designee prior to cutting any such timber. 
The notice to the city shall include: 
(1)	Prior written notice of timber harvesting for each separate tract to be harvested thereby. 
(2)	A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road. 
(3)	A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A § 48-5-7.5. 
(4)	The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest. 
(5)	The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
The notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via facsimile or by mail. 
The persons or firms subject to such notice requirement shall deliver a bond or letter of credit to the city, in which case notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the city administrator or his/her designee a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the city against any damage caused by such person or firm in an amount specified by the city not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) (O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24(b)(3)) or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. The surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. 
The notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within the city upon receipt of the same by the city or its designated agent and, if applicable, compliance with the above surety requirements of this chapter and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the city or its designated agent within three (3) business days after such change. 
Violation of the notice requirements of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Any municipal governing authority or designated agent thereof which receives a notice regarding timber harvesting operations to be conducted in whole or in part within the corporate limits of such municipality shall transmit a copy of such notice to the governing authority of the county or the designated agent thereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-5. - Timber harvesting development moratorium. 
Once tree harvesting takes place in conformity with the above regulations, no other land disturbing activities shall be permitted on the entire property for a period of six (6) months after completion of the tree harvesting operations. For purposes of this paragraph, the last date of tree harvesting shall be the last day in which a tree harvesting operation is conducted. The property owner who conducts a tree harvesting operation within the city shall be required, within thirty (30) days of the last day of tree harvesting operation, to deliver to the city administrator or his/her designee a written notice setting forth the last date of the tree harvesting operation and the identity and location of the property. Upon a property owner failing to timely notify the city administrator or his/her designee as provided above, the city administrator or his/her designee shall establish the last day of deforestation based upon the best information available. The property owner shall not be able to rebut this estimated date. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-04 , § 1, 5-4-2015) 
Sec. 23.5-6. - Zoning conditions and variances. 
The city administrator or his/her designee, as part of the review team, will conduct a preliminary review of all rezoning cases, special use permit applications and variance requests. Conditions for approval will be applied where determined necessary by the preliminary review. These conditions may be either general, or specific in nature, and will reflect the standards or provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance. Compliance with these conditions will be verified by review of a revised site plan prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
Any person, firm, corporation, company, or partnership violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined the maximum amount as provided for in the City of Palmetto's Charter and/or penalized as provided for in any ordinance which may be adopted by the city. Where an offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. The owner of the premises, where anything in violation of this chapter shall exist, or any person, firm, corporation, company, or partnership which may have assisted in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as herein provided. Further, a violation of this chapter shall result in the denial of any permit or application, including but not limited to building and rezoning for the entire property where the violation occurred for a period of three (3) years after the violation. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Secs. 23.5-7—23.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTY SUBJECT TO LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT 

Sec. 23.5-21. - Tree removal standards, guidelines and permitting procedures (property subject to a land disturbance permit). 
(a)	A tree removal permit is required to remove any tree larger than eight (8) inches in diameter from any property that is subject to a land disturbance permit. The fee for obtaining a tree removal permit will be part of the land disturbance permit fee and will be based on the number of trees to be removed. Some tree removal permits may be granted without a tree removal fee in accordance with this chapter. If any specimen trees are removed from any property without a tree removal permit, the property owner shall pay a fine of three times the tree removal fee calculated. Minimum required site tree densities must be maintained at all times. Failure to maintain the required tree densities may result in re-plantings. 
(b)	Prior to the submission of any permit drawings, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the city administrator or his/her designee to discuss the tree protection and landscape ordinance as it relates to the applicant's property. The purpose of the pre-submittal conference is to clarify the provisions and procedures of this chapter and review applicable standards and guidelines for the submittal of documents, and required tree protection, replacement, and maintenance measures. 
(c)	A tree protection and replacement plan shall be prepared and submitted with other permit drawings, as part of the plan approval and/or land disturbance permit process to the city administrator or his/her designee. These plans will be reviewed by the city administrator or his/her designee for compliance with the city zoning ordinance and this chapter in particular and either approved, denied, or returned for revisions. Any comments will be made available to the designer for response or revision to the drawings. The plans shall then be resubmitted (along with previous red line comments), with the necessary changes, following the same procedure as if it were an original application. Issuance of a land disturbance permit is contingent upon approval of the tree protection and replacement plan. 
(d)	An approved tree protection and replacement plan must be implemented prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. When the developer/owner has installed the required landscaping improvements, he shall request an inspection by the city administrator or his/her designee. If the city administrator or his/her designee approves the installation, the project will be released for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the city administrator or his/her designee does not approve the plan, he shall submit a report stating his reasons for disapproval so that the developer can make the necessary corrections. After the corrections have been made, a re-inspection shall be requested. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-22. - Tree protection and replacement. 
The trees in the City of Palmetto are a city resource worth protecting and maintaining. Existing trees on public property and rights-of-way shall not be disturbed, except as provided in this article. No person shall cut carve or otherwise damage any tree. No person shall attach rope, wire, nails, or advertising posters to any tree. No person shall set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. Any large, rare, or historically significant trees on a project site shall be highlighted by the designer (see section 23.5-6). It is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. "Reasonable effort" shall include, but not be limited to, alteration of building design, alternate building location, parking area, detention area, drainage system, or relocation of utilities. Careful thought and consideration is expected to be given to saving trees in the development process. 
In the plan review process of a proposed project, the first indicator of how well trees have been incorporated in the design process is how the proposed development impacts specimen trees. These trees are considered on an individual basis and a proposal to remove any of them is carefully scrutinized. Another indicator is how the proposed development impacts smaller, significant trees. These trees are typically considered in mass as they relate to the overall protection of the natural character of the site. Removals which are not adequately justified may require site plan alterations. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-23. - Planning and design consideration. 
(a)	Tree space is the most critical factor in tree protection throughout the site development process. The root system can easily extend beyond the dripline of the tree canopy. The root system within the dripline region is generally considered to be the critical root zone. Disturbance within this zone can directly affect a tree's chances for survival. To protect these critical root zones the following planning considerations should be applied: 
(1)	The use of tree save islands and stands is encouraged rather than the protection of individual (non-specimen) trees scattered throughout a site. This will facilitate ease in overall organization as related to tree protection. 
(2)	The protective zone of specimen trees or stands of trees or otherwise designated tree save areas shall include no less than the total area defined as the critical root zone. 
(3)	The retention of native vegetation rather than invasive or exotic vegetation shall be prioritized. Existing native vegetation, forest litter and understory plants shall be preserved to the extent possible in order to reduce flow velocities and encourage sheet flow on the site. 
(4)	Tree protection and grading requirements are two design constraints, which are most often in conflict. A grade change of a few inches can be detrimental to a tree, yet most sites require extensive cut and fill in order to manage drainage. The use of berms or retaining walls, instead of cutting, to provide detention should be used to preserve significant trees. Detention ponds can be designed around significant trees by adding depth to minimize width where possible. Retaining walls can also be used to mitigate cuts and fills. Tree wells and/or aeration systems can also be provided for trees in areas of fill. 
(5)	Underground water and wastewater lines, storm sewers, irrigation lines and both underground and overhead electric and telephone lines can have a considerable impact on trees. The layout of the project site utility plans should accommodate the required tree protective zones. Utilities should be placed along corridors between tree protective zones. Developers shall coordinate the location of utility lines, including irrigation and electric lighting, with the utility companies in order to prevent root damage within the critical root zones of protected trees and to minimize damage to trees located in protected zones. 
(6)	Construction activities such as parking, material storage, concrete washout, burnhole placement, etc., shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbances within tree protective zones. No disturbance shall occur within the protective zone of specimen trees or stands of trees without prior approval of the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(7)	Sidewalks often appear innocuous on plans, but can be very detrimental to trees due to grading requirements. Considerations should be given to move sidewalks as far from tree trunks as possible and provide a finished grade above the existing grade for sidewalks required in close proximity to a tree trunk. Drainage can be routed under sidewalks where an elevated grade is required. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 3, 5-4-2015) 
Sec. 23.5-24. - Protection of existing trees. 
(a)	Tree protection devices are necessary to eliminate activities detrimental to trees including, but not limited to: 
(1)	Soil compaction in the critical root zone resulting from heavy equipment, vehicular or excessive pedestrian traffic, or storage of equipment or materials; 
(2)	Root disturbance due to cuts, fills, or trenching; 
(3)	Wounds to exposed roots, trunks, or limbs by mechanical equipment; and 
(4)	Other activities such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning, fire, etc. 
(b)	Existing trees identified to be preserved and counted as credit towards meeting required site tree density shall have a four-foot tree protection fencing installed at the critical root zones. For methods of tree protection, see subsections (d)(1) through (6) of this section. Tree protection devices shall be installed prior to the start of any land disturbance and maintained until final landscaping is installed. No construction activities are to occur within tree protection areas. Areas designated for parking, materials and equipment storage or staging areas are to be located outside of the drip line of existing trees. 
(c)	The city administrator or his/her designee will conduct periodic inspections of the site before work begins and during clearing, construction, and post construction phases of development in order to ensure compliance with these regulations and the intent of this chapter. Tree protection measures must remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development. Failure to comply with and/or maintain approved tree protection measures may result in a stop work order issued by the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(d)	Methods of tree protection. The root system within the drip line is generally considered to be the critical root zone. Most trees can tolerate only a small percentage of critical root zone loss. To protect these critical root zones, a tree protection area shall be established around each tree or group of trees to be retained. The following section describes ways to help control unnecessary encroachment on existing trees. These methods and guidelines will be followed for tree protection throughout all phases of construction. These guidelines are designed to reduce damage to critical root zones and wounds to exposed roots, trunks, and limbs by chemical, mechanical, and other means. Tree protection areas will be delineated on tree protection plan and methods of protection will be clearly noted and detailed. 
(1)	Active protective barriers. Barriers shall be installed along the outer edge of and completely around the critical root zones of all specimen trees or stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones, prior to any land disturbance. Deviations from this must be approved on an individual basis by the city administrator or his/her designee. Barriers will be a minimum four (4) feet high. Construction of the fence shall conform to the detail provided in Appendix B. All tree protection zones shall be designated as such with "tree save area" signs posted visibly on all sides of the fenced in area. All tree fencing shall be maintained throughout the land disturbance and building construction, and shall not be removed until all construction and landscaping is complete. 
(2)	Passive protective barriers. Tree save areas and their critical root zones not within sixty (60) feet of any grading, storage, construction or traffic areas may be protected by four-foot orange plastic safety fencing or continuous plastic flagging. Tree protection materials shall consist of heavy mil, plastic flagging, a minimum four inches in width with dark letters reading "Tree Protection Area. Do Not Enter." or equivalent signage on a continuous durable restraint. Passive tree protection fencing is to be used only for areas remote from construction activity. 
(3)	Boring. No open trenching will be allowed within the protected zone as defined by the protective barricades. All underground utilities to be installed within this protection zone shall be installed by boring underneath the root zone. Utilities may be tunneled in the root zone at a twenty-four-inch minimum depth providing that plans are approved showing the location and method. 
(4)	Filling/clearing within root zone. Fill dirt no deeper than two inches may be allowed within the drip line of the tree. No grubbing is permitted in the root zone. In the protected root zone, any stumps, dead trees and shrub growth to be removed shall be cut flush or ground out. Stump grinding will be accomplished with equipment and methods acceptable in normal arboriculture operations. All holes will be backfilled completely the same day of the operation. 
(5)	Clearing adjacent to tree save areas. Roots often fuse and tangle amongst trees. The removal of trees adjacent to tree save areas can cause inadvertent damage to the protected trees. Wherever possible, it is advisable to cut minimum two-foot trenches (e.g., with a ditch witch) along the limits of land disturbance, so as to cut, rather than tear, the roots. Trenching may be required for the protection of specimen trees. The cutting down and then grinding the stump of the adjacent removed trees, as opposed to bulldozing them and ripping their roots, can also aid the protected trees. 
(6)	Tree removal. To minimize potential root loss from soil disturbance in an overlapping root situation, all roots attached to a tree inside a tree save area that extend outside the tree save areas shall be cut by hand if the soil is to be disturbed. The removal of any tree adjacent to a tree within a tree save area shall not be removed by heavy equipment. Cutting the roots by hand or with a ditch witch is acceptable. 
(7)	Paving limitations. Construction of sidewalks or permeable parking access points may encroach into tree protection zones, so long as such areas are approved by the city administrator or his or her designee and the following conditions are met: 
a.	No more than ten (10) percent of the protected critical root zone may be covered by sidewalks, up to twenty (20) percent of this area may be covered by permeable parking areas or permeable driveway access points or a combination of sidewalks and permeable parking or permeable driveway access areas. 
b.	Sidewalks shall be raised to avoid root damage, private sidewalks may be constructed with asphalt if a concrete or brick sidewalk would damage the trees roots; and 
c.	Permeable paving shall provide water and gaseous exchange to the tree roots, and the existing grade shall not be lowered or raised, except that the finished paved surface may be an average of size inches above the existing grade. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 4, 5-4-2015) 
Sec. 23.5-25. - Determination of site density factors. 
(a)	All projects within the city, with the exception of the construction of individual single-family and detached dwellings, shall maintain in perpetuity or exceed a minimum site density factor of twelve (12) units per acre. 
Minimum tree site density shall be calculated as shown below: 

 
Required Minimum Site Density = 12 units × 20 acres = 240 units required. 
(b)	The term "unit" is not synonymous with "tree." The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, and or planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this article, or some combination of the two. Unit values are computed as provided at Appendix C. 
(c)	Existing and proposed trees outside established zoning buffers can be used for density credit. Proposed trees shall be reasonably distributed throughout the site with emphasis on tree groupings to achieve results following professional landscape standards. 
(d)	The minimum sized existing tree that will count toward tree density credit is eight (8) inches caliper dbh (eight (8) inches). All existing trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried as specified in Appendix C. 
(e)	New trees shall be provided utilizing a combination of shade/canopy trees and understory trees in a ratio of 1 to 3. The site density requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. 
(f)	Individual single-family lots, with four or less residential units per acre are required to provide a site density factor of two (2) tree units per acre. This density shall be achieved by planting a combination of shade/canopy trees and understory trees in a ratio of 1 to 3 with a minimum of one (1) shade/canopy required. Shade/canopy trees shall be at least ten (10) feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than three (3) caliper inches. Understory shall be at least six (6) feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than two (2) caliper inches. Fifty (50) percent of the required planting shall be placed in the front yard. All residential lots shall require that improvements be located so as to provide minimum disturbance to the natural topography of the site and protection to the maximum number of trees. Existing trees that are protected and saved on the lot can be credited toward the lot density requirement as well as the overall subdivision requirement. 
(g)	Where the proposed development area is considered infill development or is so dense that the minimum site density factor cannot reasonably be achieved, the development area shall be reduced by removing parking spaces in excess of the minimum number of spaces required by zoning, placing additional planting islands within the development area, or reducing the area to be occupied by buildings, or plant and maintain replacement trees off site at locations to be approved by the city. 
(h)	Any tree, designated on the tree protection plan to be saved, which is damaged during construction or as a result of construction, as determined by the city administrator or his/her designee, shall be replaced with a tree or trees equal to the unit value of the tree damaged. 
(i)	Trees which are used to meet the tree density requirements shall be maintained for two (2) years after the date of final inspection and kept in perpetuity in all zoning classifications. It is the responsibility of the property owner to water and fertilize trees in order to maintain tree health and vigor. Failure to maintain the required tree density factor at any time during the life of the project shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(j)	The developer/owner shall guarantee all plant materials for a minimum of two (2) years from implementation. The city administrator or his/her designee shall inspect said improvements and shall make a determination of whether or not the required trees and landscaping are healthy and have a reasonable chance of surviving to maturity. The owner shall be notified by letter of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with this article. All unhealthy and dead plant material shall be replaced within forty-five (45) days in conformance with the approved landscaping plan. 
(k)	Where the city administrator or his/her designee determines that minimum tree density cannot be met due to natural site constraints, the number of trees to be planted or maintained on a site or lot shall be determined by the city administrator or his/her designee based on site review. Thereafter, the owner/developer/builder shall, with the concurrence of the city administrator or his/her designee, provide the remaining balance of required trees to be planted on city property, including rights-of-way of existing streets. When this approach is exercised, the city shall first determine the variety, size, and number of trees to be furnished by the owner/developer/builder. The city will then obtain prices from a minimum of two (2) plant nurseries and/or landscape contractors, selected by the city to supply and plant the required plant materials. Prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, an amount equal to the lower of the bid prices will be paid by the owner/developer/builder to the city. The city, at its option, may elect to proceed to have planting done on city land or right-of-way or to hold these funds until more suitable planting conditions prevail. Upon payment, the owner/developer/builder will be relieved of any further responsibility for the fulfillment of these requirements for the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 5, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 23.5-26. - Specimen trees. 
(a)	Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for protection. These trees are referred to as specimen trees. Trees unique due to age, size, species or historic relevance are to be identified during the survey process and special consideration must be made to work around them (see section 23.5-22). It is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. "Reasonable effort" shall include, but not limited to, alteration of building design, alternate building location, parking area, detention area, drainage system, or relocation of utilities. These trees are to be identified and highlighted on the tree protection plan. Design of buildings, hardscapes and utilities are to be developed with consideration to preserving and featuring specimen trees. 
(b)	The following criteria are used by the city to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify: 
(1)	Size criteria: 
a.	Large hardwoods (oaks, poplars, sweetgums, etc.): twenty-four-inch (24″) diameter or larger. 
b.	Large softwoods (pines, deodar cedar, etc.): thirty-inch (30″) diameter or larger. 
c.	Small trees (dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc.): eight-inch (8″) diameter or larger. 
(2)	Condition criteria: 
a.	Life expectancy of more than fifteen (15) years. 
b.	Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay. 
c.	No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
d.	No major insect or pathological problem. 
(c)	Replacement of specimen trees: 
(1)	In the event any specimen trees are to be removed during the land development process, the applicant shall be required to replace the specimen trees being removed with suitable replacement trees. Removed specimen trees shall be replaced by species with potential for comparable size and quality. 
(2)	Specimen tree replacement will be required, in addition to the minimum required tree density requirements. 
(3)	Specimen trees that are removed must be replaced by trees, minimum three-inch caliper, and equal to the unit value of the specimen tree removed. To determine if the replacement is reasonable the city administrator or his/her designee shall consider the intended use of: 
a.	Existing tree coverage, size, and type; 
b.	Number of trees to be removed on the entire property; 
c.	Number of trees to be saved on the entire property; 
d.	Area to be covered with structures, parking, and driveways; 
e.	Grading and drainage requirements; and 
f.	Character of the site and its environs. 
(4)	Disturbance or encroachment into the critical root zone of a specimen tree exceeding thirty (30) percent of the root zone will constitute the loss of the tree and require recompense as described in subsection (c)(3), above. 
(5)	In the event any specimen tree or trees should not survive more than twenty-four (24) months following completion of development, the owner of the property shall be required to replace said tree or trees with replacement trees (three-inch minimum caliper) equal to the unit value of the specimen tree. 
(6)	Any specimen tree which is removed without appropriate review and approval of the city administrator or his/her designee must be replaced by trees equaling a two times the unit value of the specimen tree removed. The owner of the property shall be required to replace said tree or trees with replacement trees which will be four-inch minimum caliper. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is not sufficient evidence of its condition. Such action may also result in a stop work order issued by the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-27. - Parking lot tree requirements. 
(a)	Parking lots containing ten (10) or more parking spaces shall be landscaped as indicated below. All trees planted to satisfy parking lot requirements can be applied to site density requirements. 
(b)	Trees shall be provided and maintained adjacent to and in the interior of parking lots in the ratio of one tree for each five (5) parking spaces. In addition each parking space shall be within sixty (60) feet of the trunk of a tree. 
(c)	Trees provided to comply with this section shall be deciduous shade trees from Appendix "A" Large Canopy/Shade Tree List and shall be at least two and one-half (2½) caliper inches at the time of planting. 
(d)	Parking lot planting. 
(1)	There shall be a minimum curb radii of three feet required on the corners of all landscape islands and medians to allow for free movement of motor vehicles around planting materials. Although innovative storm water management techniques are strongly encouraged, all islands and medians shall have raised curbs unless other storm water management techniques are approved. 
(2)	Striping of parking islands is not permitted. 
(3)	Parking lot lighting shall be coordinated with the tree locations in the parking lot. 
(4)	At the end of all rows of parking a terminal landscape island or area shall be provided to protect parked vehicles, confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways, and provide space for landscaping. A terminal island for a single row of parking spaces shall be planted with a least one canopy/shade tree. A terminal island for a double row of parking spaces shall contain two shade/canopy trees. 

(5)	All landscape islands within parking lots shall be one hundred (100) percent landscaped with deciduous trees, evergreen shrubs or native grasses (not to exceed three (3) feet high at maturity unless part of an approved low impact development stormwater feature), ground cover (which does not require mowing) and/or flowers in mulched beds). 
(6)	Parking areas designated to comply with this section must install landscape islands so that no more than ten (10) adjacent parking spaces exist without a landscaped island. 
(7)	All landscape islands shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking lot. 
(8)	Parking lot islands shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet measured from back of curb to back of curb and be equal in length to the adjoining parking space. 
(9)	Landscaped areas between parking areas and buildings shall not be considered as interior landscaping. 
(10)	Areas used principally for storage of vehicles or display areas do not require interior islands if such areas are screened from adjacent properties and public streets. 
(11)	The perimeter of all parking areas shall be landscaped as a minimum with groundcover or turf. 
(12)	Where parking lots abut a public right-of-way a ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided back from the property line. The strip shall contain a continuous evergreen hedge to screen the parking lot. Plantings in the hedge should be spaced such that a continuous hedge is created within three (3) years of planting. The hedge shall not exceed three (3) feet in height or block vehicular site distance at the site entry. This requirement shall be coordinated with any requirement of section 23.5-28 when requirements overlap. Parking lots are considered not to abut a public right-of-way if constructed at a distance exceeding the setback distance. 
(13)	Where parking lots abut side or rear property lines or differing uses within mixed use developments the strip shall contain a continuous evergreen hedge to screen the parking lot. When a parking lot abuts an undisturbed zoning buffer this requirement is not applicable. Parking lots are considered not to abut a side or rear property line if constructed at a distance exceeding the setback distance. 
(14)	Trees shall be planted at a minimum of three (3) feet from any curb or edge of pavement, so as to prevent injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. Where landscaped areas are located adjacent to vehicle overhangs, the trees shall be planted in line with the striping between parking spaces in order to avoid injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. Curb stops must be used to prevent vehicle overhang into required landscape strips and parking islands when curbing is not used. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 6, 5-4-2015) 
Sec. 23.5-28. - Landscape planting strip requirements. 
(a)	Landscape strips shall be used to enhance the public appearance of any non residential property located along a public right-of-way. The following minimum requirements shall apply to landscape planting strips: 
(b)	Landscape strips. 
(1)	Landscape plantings shall be provided in a landscape strip of at least ten (10) feet in width adjacent to any street right-of-way abutting the property and running the length of the entire property frontage, or as required by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
(2)	No permanent structures are permitted within landscape strips, with the exception of identification signage and light posts. This includes pavement, retaining walls, curbing, dumpsters, drainage structures, detention facilities, rip-rap, utility boxes, vacuum/air/water, etc. 
(3)	Landscape strips shall contain one (1) canopy tree (min. two and one-half-inch caliper) per fifty (50) feet and one (1) understory (min. one and one-half-inch caliper) tree per twenty-five (25) feet. Clumping is permitted provided that adequate spacing is allowed for future growth of the tree and there is no gap greater than fifty (50) feet. 


(4)	The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded, or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted with shrubs or native grasses. Landscape strips located adjacent to parking lots must comply with the requirements of section 23.5-27. 
(5)	Where landscaping areas adjoin grassed rights-of-way, such areas shall be considered part of the landscaped area for purposes of maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 7, 5-4-2015) 
Sec. 23.5-29. - Buffers. 
(a)	As directed by the Palmetto Zoning Ordinance, buffers are required to achieve a visual barrier between properties of different use. However, existing or proposed plant material located within a buffer cannot be applied toward density requirements of a site. The area of a buffer can be subtracted from the total area of a site when calculating density requirements. 
(b)	Buffer widths shall be as indicated in the zoning ordinance or as allowed by variance or zoning conditions. Unless otherwise directed by zoning or this chapter buffers shall remain undisturbed. When existing vegetation exists in a buffer it shall be protected from encroachment during construction. 
(c)	Where buffers are void of existing vegetation adequate enough to provide a visual barrier or the buffers have been violated, the owner/developer is responsible for replanting. A formula based on the square footage of the entire buffer or portion thereof that is void of adequate material will be applied. 
(d)	The City of Palmetto encourages the control or elimination of invasive plant material including Chinese privet, kudzu, wisteria, etc. Selective clearing in buffers to remove noxious or invasive plant material and the methods of removal will require the approval of the city administrator or his/her designee. Selective buffer clearing will be reviewed on a case by case basis. Removal of material may require the replanting to buffer standards if the buffer is over cleared. 
Type I Buffer shall be applied to all buffers less than fifty (50) feet wide: 
The following plant material shall be provided per one thousand (1,000) square feet of buffer area to be vegetated. 

1 Shade/Canopy trees 
5 Evergreen understory trees 
15 large evergreen shrubs 
  
EXAMPLE 1: 50 FOOT BUFFER 
1750 sf Buffer area 
1.75 × 1 tree = 2 trees 
1.75 × 5 Understory trees = 9 trees 
1.75 × 15 Large shrubs = 26 shrubs 
Round up when quantity exceeds .5 
  
Type II Buffer shall be applied to all buffers fifty (50) feet wide and more: 
The following plant material shall be provided per one thousand (1,000) square feet of buffer area to be vegetated. 

1 Shade/Canopy trees 
5 Evergreen understory trees 
15 large evergreen shrubs 
  
EXAMPLE 2: 100 FOOT BUFFER 
3500 sf Buffer area 
3.5 × 1 tree = 4 trees 
3.5 × 5 Understory trees = 18 trees 
3.5 × 15 Large shrubs = 53 shrubs 
Round up when quantity exceeds .5 
Minimum tree sizes upon installation in both Type I and Type II Buffers are as follows: 
Canopy/shade tree size: 2-inch caliper 
Understory evergreen: 6 feet high 
Large shrub size 24″ high 
In addition to the material required for the Type II Buffer, a continuous six-foot high opaque wood fence shall be installed at the property line along the entire buffer when no effective vegetation exists. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-30. - Screening. 
Screening shall consist of the visual blocking of views of onsite service equipment and areas. The following items shall be screened as indicated below. 
(1)	Dumpster and trash storage/collection areas shall be adequately screened so as not to be visible from streets and/or adjacent properties regardless of adjacent land use or zoning classification. Enclosures must be constructed of the same exterior wall material used for the building. The enclosure shall be a foot higher than what is contained in the interior. 
(2)	Loading/service areas shall be adequately screened so as not to be visible from any streets and/or adjacent properties. These areas shall be screened using upright evergreen plantings, six (6) feet tall at the time of installation, spaced at a maximum of eight (8) feet on center. 
(3)	Heating and cooling units for all developments including single-family shall be adequately screened with vegetation so as not to be visible from streets and/or adjoining properties. 
(4)	Non-amenity detention ponds and other related storm water management facilities shall be screened from view by a continuous evergreen screen thirty-six (36) inches tall at the time of installation and maintained at a minimum height of forty-two (42) inches. Maintenance access may remain open but arranged to prevent direct view into the facility. Innovative stormwater solutions such as bioretention areas or bioswales may be exempt from the requirement of the continuous evergreen screen with approval of the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(5)	Plants shall be spaced so as to provide for effective visual screening within three (3) growing seasons. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 8, 5-4-2015) 
Sec. 23.5-31. - Building landscape requirements. 
This section relates to landscaping required adjacent to proposed buildings that are subject to this chapter including single-family residences. Any building subject to a building permit will be required to provide a five-foot wide landscape strip along any face of the building that faces a public way. Landscaping in this area shall be comprised of a combination of shrubs and understory trees that soften the façade of the building. The following combination of plant material shall be provided: 
(1)	Building landscaping: 
a.	Provide one understory tree per twenty-five (25) feet of building width. The required understory tree must be a minimum of six (6) feet tall at installation and shall be chosen from the city's approved plant list. 
b.	Provide one evergreen shrub per four (4) linear feet of building width. The required shrub must be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches tall at installation and shall be chosen from the city's approved plant list for small shrubs. 
c.	Building width is defined as the width of the portion of the building that faces a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-32. - Preparation of the tree protection plan. 
(a)	Tree protection plan requirements. Any proposal for development or improvement of any tract of land shall include a tree protection/replacement plan, including trees to be planted in order to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter. Such plan shall be submitted, along with other permit drawings, to the city administrator or his/her designee prior to any clearing, grubbing, grading or other removal of the existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage. No tree removal shall occur prior to approval of the tree protection plan. The tree protection plan may be submitted as part of a landscape plan, provided that all required information is legible, or as a separate drawing which includes, as a minimum, the following: 
(1)	Name, address, and phone number of owner of record and applicant. 
(2)	Boundary lines of the tract by lengths and bearings, streets adjoining the property, total area of the tract, land lot, land district, north point, graphic scale, and date. 
(3)	Surveyed location of all specimen trees and their critical root zones. Indicate those specimen trees proposed for removal or for protection. Removal of specimen trees is subject to city administrator or his/her designee's approval. When encroaching on the critical root zone of a specimen tree, indicate the percent of impact. 
(4)	Approximate location of all trees or stands of trees proposed to be protected and their critical root zone. Only trees that are designated on the tree protection plan will be counted towards density requirements. 
(5)	Location of proposed buildings, structures, low impact development features and paved areas. 
(6)	Locations of all existing and proposed utility lines. (Utility lines must be placed along corridors outside critical root zones of trees which will remain on the site.) 
(7)	Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
(8)	Limits of tree protection areas, showing trees to be maintained and planted, specifying species and size. 
(9)	Grade changes or other work adjacent to a tree, which would effect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
(10)	Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all tree protection zones, including tree fencing, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signage, etc. 
(11)	Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of all tree protection measures. 
(12)	Plan should indicate staging areas for parking, materials storage, concrete washout, and debris burn where these areas might affect tree protection. 
(13)	The required site tree density factor must be satisfied. Compliance shall be clearly demonstrated on the tree protection plan. Existing trees or stands of trees used in the density calculation must be clearly indicated on the drawing. A summary table of the number of existing trees to remain and new trees to be planted, by diameter shall be shown along with the calculations showing tree density achieved for the site. 
(14)	Additional information as required on a case by case basis. This could include, but is not limited to, a certified arborist's appraisal of the tree's viability and projected life span. 
(15)	Tree protection plans must be prepared and sealed by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
(16)	The following notes shall be indicated on both the tree protection plan and the grading plan in large bold letters. Additional notes may be required on a case by case basis. 
a.	CONTACT THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR OR HIS/HER DESIGNEE TO ARRANGE A PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE PRIOR TO ANY LAND DISTURBANCE. 
b.	ALL TREE PROTECTION MEASURES SHALL BE INSTALLED AND INSPECTED PRIOR TO THE START OF ANY LAND DISTURBANCE AND MAINTAINED UNTIL FINAL LANDSCAPING IS INSTALLED. CALL THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR OR HIS/HER DESIGNEE FOR AN INSPECTION. 
c.	NO PARKING, STORAGE, OR ANY OTHER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES ARE TO OCCUR WITHIN TREE PROTECTION AREAS. 
d.	A MAINTENANCE INSPECTION OF TREES WILL BE PERFORMED AFTER TWO FULL GROWING SEASONS FROM THE DATE OF THE FINAL CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION. PROJECT OWNERS AT THE TIME OF THE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 9, 5-4-2015) 
Sec. 23.5-33. - Maintenance. 
After two (2) full growing seasons from the date of the inspection of new tree installations, the city administrator or his/her designee will inspect all trees on the project site. Any trees planted to meet the required tree site density factor which are dead or near death must be replaced. 
Trees preserved to meet the required site densities which are dead or near death at the time of the maintenance inspection must be replaced. Trees which are used to meet the requirements for this chapter shall be maintained for twenty-four (24) months after the date of the final inspection. Maintenance on replacement trees will be required for an additional two (2) years. 
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying property subject to this chapter to maintain said property in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance. Property shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Planting beds shall be mulched to prevent weed growth and maintain soil moisture. Plant materials shall be pruned as required to maintain good health and character. Turf areas shall be mowed periodically. All roadways, curbs, and sidewalks shall be edged when necessary in order to prevent encroachment from adjacent grassed areas. 
All undisturbed buffers shall be maintained to insure the containment of invasive plant material. The spreading of any material from the buffer onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way is not permitted. The property owner is responsible for the control of this material and may be subject to a fine if these areas are not maintained. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-34. - Maintenance bonds. 
New tree plantings or existing protected trees used to meet the density requirements of this section for commercial developments shall be maintained for two (2) years after the date of final inspection and shall require the posting of a maintenance bond by the applicant. All maintenance bonds shall be in an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the estimated cost of replacement of the newly planted or existing protected trees; provided, however, that if the applicant has previously failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, the city may require that the amount of the bond be equal to fifty (50) percent of the estimated cost to replace the newly planted or existing protected trees. 
(1)	During the period of the two-year maintenance bond, the city administrator or his/her designee shall have the right to conduct periodic inspections during normal business hours in order to confirm the health and viability of all required trees. 
(2)	If the city administrator or his/her designee finds that trees planted or protected to meet the required site density are dead or near death, the city administrator or his/her designee shall so notify the applicant and the applicant shall replace those trees with trees of similar size within thirty (30) days of notification. The failure of the applicant to timely plant any such replacement trees shall result in forfeiture of the maintenance bond. 
(3)	Not sooner than one hundred eighty (180) days nor later than one hundred fifty (150) days prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond, the applicant shall petition the city administrator or his/her designee to release the maintenance bond. Upon receipt of the petition, the city administrator or his/her designee shall inspect the project to determine the health and viability of all required trees. If the city administrator or his/her designee finds that trees need to be replaced, the city administrator or his/her designee shall so notify the applicant and the applicant shall timely perform such additional work necessary to comply with the tree density requirements. The failure of the applicant to timely replace the trees specified by the city administrator or his/her designee may result in forfeiture of the maintenance bond. Upon the city administrator or his/her designee's final determination that all required trees are healthy, the city administrator or his/her designee shall so notify the applicant, and the maintenance bond shall be released. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-35. - Performance bonds. 
New tree plantings used to meet the density requirement of this chapter for commercial or residential developments may be postponed for up to six (6) months provided that a performance bond is obtained. The basis for delay must be that either planting stock availability is low or weather conditions are not appropriate for planting new trees. All performance bonds shall be submitted to the city with appropriate documentation and justification of low plant stock availability and/or adverse weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-36. - Irrigation. 
(a)	In order to facilitate maintenance and help establish plant material required by this chapter water shall be available in one (1) or both of the following methods. 
(b)	As a minimum, provide a water resource (hose connection) within two hundred (200) feet of all plantings to facilitate hand watering as necessary to establish planting. 
(c)	In lieu of or in addition to the above, irrigation can be provided. 
(d)	An underground irrigation system is required for landscaped areas on multi-family, commercial and industrial developments fronting on a public right-of-way. 
(e)	Wherever feasible, sprinkler head irrigating lawns or other high water demand landscape areas shall be zoned so that they are on a separate zone from zones irrigating trees, shrubbery or other reduced water requirement areas. 
(f)	Automatically controlled irrigation systems shall be operated by an irrigation controller that is capable of watering high water requirement areas on a different schedule from low water requirement areas. 
(g)	No overthrow shall be allowed onto nonpervious areas. 
(h)	Irrigation circuits shall apply water onto lawn areas on a different schedule than those irrigating the planting beds. Low trajectory heads or low volume water distributing devices shall be used. 
(i)	Irrigation systems shall include rain sensor equipment and follow all requirements established by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Secs. 23.5-37—23.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTY NOT SUBJECT TO LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT 

Sec. 23.5-51. - Tree removal standards, guidelines and permitting procedures (property not subject to a land disturbance permit). 
This section pertains to tree removal for reasons other than land development. 
(1)	Safety standards. The property owner, whether individually or through a contractor, engaged in tree removal shall be solely responsible for pedestrian and vehicular safety and control within the work site and shall provide the necessary warning devices, barricades, and ground personnel needed to give safety, protection, and warning within the area where tree removal or pruning is to occur. Blocking of public streets shall not be permitted unless prior arrangements have been made with the city administrator or his/her designee. Traffic control shall be accomplished in conformance with state, county and local highway construction codes. 
(2)	Debris and logs shall not be left on the public right-of-way overnight. The property owner shall be the responsible for disposal of, in a proper and acceptable manner, all logs, brush and debris resulting from the tree removal operation. No burying of debris will be allowed on site. No burning will be allowed on site without prior approval by the city administrator or his/her designee. 
(3)	It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such a manner that they will not obstruct or shade street lights, obstruct passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct views of any street intersection. Any trees that are diseased or insect infested shall be removed, sprayed, or treated in such a manner that they will not infect or damage nearby public vegetation or cause harm to the community or citizens therein. The city administrator or his/her designee may order trees on private land that cause obstructions, present insect or disease problems, or otherwise present a danger to public health or safety be pruned, removed, or treated. 
(4)	A tree removal permit is required prior to the removal of trees. A permit will be necessary regardless of whether a permit fee is assessed, except, the removal of trees on their own residential property shall not require a permit for trees less than twelve inches in diameter. If trees are removed from any property without a tree removal permit, the property owner shall pay a fine of three times the tree removal fee calculated. 
(5)	Specimen tree removal will require a permit. See section 23.5-26 for specimen tree criteria. The removal of specimen trees from any property without a tree removal permit shall result in the property owner being subject to a fine of three times the tree removal fee calculated. 
(6)	Trees shall be removed in accordance with accepted industry standards and procedures. Care shall be taken so as to prevent limbs, branches and trunks from falling and creating damage to adjacent homes, driveways, sidewalks, trees, shrubs, streets and other property, both public and private. All contractors for tree removal must be licensed, bonded, and insured. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-52. - Tree pruning. 
No permit is required for pruning trees. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Secs. 23.5-53—23.5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEVERABILITY; EFFECTIVE DATE; CONFLICTS 

Sec. 23.5-71. - Severability. 
Should any article, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the mayor and council for the City of Palmetto that each article, clause and provision hereof be severable. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-72. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its adoption by the mayor and council of the City of Palmetto. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
Sec. 23.5-73. - Conflicts. 
In instances where other ordinances or parts of ordinances are in conflict with this chapter, the most stringent requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, 4-6-09) 
APPENDIX A. CITY OF PALMETTO APPROVED PLANT LIST 

 
APPENDIX B. TREE PROTECTION FENCING 

;b;APPENDIX C. CALCULATION CHARTS FOR REQUIRED TREE DENSITY;\b> 

 

 

 

 

 
;b;APPENDIX C. CALCULATION CHARTS FOR REQUIRED TREE DENSITY;\b> 
Chapter 24 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal utilities, § 39.1. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Debt collection. 
The city may take necessary steps to collect any outstanding debt or claim due to the city through any means provided by federal, state, or local law which may include the use of the small claims court, a collection agency, or any other means of collection. The cost associated with the processing and collection of the outstanding debt shall be the responsibility of the debtor. 
(Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Secs. 24-2—24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

Sec. 24-26. - Electrical rates and meter deposits. 
The rates for electricity and the amount of meter deposit to be charged consumers shall be as prescribed by resolution of the governing body; a schedule is to be maintained in the office of the city administrator. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3) 
Sec. 24-27. - Unlawful restoration of service. 
Whenever electrical service shall have been discontinued or cut off by the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, except an authorized agent or employee of the city, to restore the service. 
(Code 1977, § 17-5) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 24-28. - Tampering, interfering with meters, apparatus; unlawful use, diversion of service. 
Whoever unlawfully and intentionally injures or destroys, or permits to be injured or destroyed, any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to the city and a part of its system or works for the transformation or distribution of electricity for lighting or power purposes, or unlawfully and intentionally prevents an electric meter from duly registering the quantity of electricity supplied or in any way interferes with its proper or just registration, or, without the consent of the city, unlawfully and intentionally diverts any electric current from any wire of the city, or otherwise unlawfully and intentionally uses or causes to be used, without the consent of the city, any electricity transformed or distributed by it, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 17-4(a)) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Secs. 24-29—24-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 24-46. - Assessments. 
(a)	Assessments shall be levied against affected property or its owners for water lines as provided in this section. Six-inch water mains shall be laid at the prorated rate per lot determined at the time of such construction. 
(b)	All such assessments shall be due at the time of completing such construction. Any affected owner may at his option pay twenty-five (25) percent down and the balance in three (3) equal yearly payments of principal plus accrued interest at seven (7) percent provided such owner shall execute a proper lien agreement for same to the city in recordable form properly describing the affected property. 
(c)	Such assessments as herein called for shall create a lien on the affected owner and his property and in case a person is delinquent in payment of same, the same shall be enforced by issuing execution against such delinquent person or his property directed to an officer authorized to execute same who shall levy on the property and conduct a sale in the manner prescribed for sheriffs' sales in this state. 
(d)	The governing body shall have the right to compel citizens to tap on to such services when made available. 
(e)	No new water main shall be laid unless fifty-one (51) percent of the affected owners petition for same, and then only after a public hearing is held with all affected owners being notified of such hearing at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. Notice by the city administrator to each affected owner placed in the United States mail to the last known address of such owner with sufficient postage thereon shall be sufficient. 
(f)	The city administrator shall be responsible for all things needful and necessary to administer and enforce this section, except the field work shall be the responsibility of the person in charge of the water and sewer department. 
(g)	Nothing in this section shall affect any contract between the city and any person or institution. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1(a)—(e), (g), (h)) 
Sec. 24-47. - Tap fees. 
Water tap fees shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council and a schedule of such fees is on file in the office of the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 85-6, § 17-2, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 94-04, § 1, 9-6-94) 
Sec. 24-48. - Rates and meter deposits. 
The rates for water and the amount of meter deposits to be charged consumers shall be as prescribed by resolution of the governing body. A schedule is to be maintained in the office of the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 17-3.1, 7-2-85) 
Sec. 24-49. - Unlawful restoration of service. 
Whenever water service shall have been discontinued or cut off by the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, except an authorized agent or employee of the city, to restore the service. 
(Code 1977, § 17-5) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 24-50. - Damaging, tampering with equipment. 
Whoever unlawfully and intentionally injures or destroys, or permits to be injured or destroyed, any meter, pipe, conduit or other apparatus belonging to the city and a part of its waterworks system, or unlawfully and intentionally prevents a water meter from duly registering the quantity of water supplied or in any way interferes with its proper or just registration, or, without the consent of the city, unlawfully and intentionally diverts water from any water main or pipe of the city, or otherwise unlawfully and intentionally uses or causes to be used, without the consent of the city, any water pumped or distributed by it, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 17-4) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 24-51. - Restrictions on outdoor watering. 
(a)	Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(b)	Subsection (a) of this section shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the department to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(6)	Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)	Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface well is on said property; 
(10)	Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)	Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)	Hydroseeding. 
(c)	In case of an emergency which immediately threatens the public health, safety, or welfare, the mayor and council may impose more stringent restrictions on outdoor water use than those contained above, however, such emergency restrictions shall be valid for a period not exceeding seven (7) days unless a variance is obtained from the director of the state Environmental Protection Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7(a)(2). 
(d)	As used in this Code section, the term rain sensor shut-off switch means an electric device that detects and measures rainfall amounts and overrides the cycle of an irrigation system so as to turn off such system when a predetermined amount of rain has fallen. 
(1)	All residential and commercial automatic sprinkler systems installed for the purpose of landscape irrigation shall be equipped with a functioning rain sensor/shut-off device that ensures the automatic irrigation system will not operate during times of precipitation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 1-3-11; Ord. No. 2012-02, 3-5-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 2011, repealed the former section and enacted a new one as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 90-06, 7-2-90; Ord. No. 90-07, 7-7-90; Ord. No. 95-03, 9-5-95. 
Secs. 24-52—24-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Powers relative to sewers and drains, § 36.1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
ASTM shall mean the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Automatic grease recovery unit shall mean an electronic grease removal system used on the interior to collect liquid wastewater from kitchen equipment. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
Commercial waste shall mean nontoxic and nonhazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities. The term shall also include fats, oil, grease, food scraps, and other grease trap contents generated by a food operation or institutional food preparation facility and any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharges to an oil water separator and/or sand trap. 
Commercial waste FOG permit shall mean a permit issued to a transporter for the collection of commercial waste by pumping out, cleaning, or otherwise servicing a grease trap, oil water separator, or sand trap. 
Disposer shall mean a licensed person or company that receives commercial waste from a transporter for disposal. 
Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
Generator shall mean a person or company that produces commercial waste. 
Grease trap shall mean a structure or device found in commercial food facilities that separates and retains fats, oil, and grease waste prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
Industrial wastes shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Installer shall mean a person or company responsible for a contracted project who, for compensation, undertakes to submit a bid to, or does himself or by others construct, install, alter, repair, or modify a pretreatment system. An installer must be a licensed contractor or master plumber in the state possessing the experience, knowledge, skill, and ability to provide services pertaining to the installation, construction, alteration, repair, and design of a pretreatment system. 
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water. 
Oil water separator shall mean a structure or device installed in commercial facilities to retain and separate oil waste prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer. 
OSHA shall mean the Occupational Safety, and Health Act of 1970 (PL91-596), as amended. 
pH shall mean the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10 -7 . 
Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Pretreatment system shall mean a grease trap, oil water separator, or sand trap installed to the exterior of the building subsurface or interior at a sink, dishwasher, floor drain, or utility sink to collect and treat commercial wastewater prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer or publically owned treatment works. 
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer shall mean a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Publicly owned treatment works shall mean "treatment works" as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which are owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Repair shall mean the replacement of, modification of, or addition to a failing pretreatment system which is necessary to allow the system to function to eliminate a public health hazard or pollution hazard. The term shall also include servicing or replacing mechanical and electrical parts, replacing with a system comparable to that which is currently inoperable, or making minor structural corrections to a tank. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Slug shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Subsurface shall mean the placement of a pretreatment system below ground or recessed in a building's floor. 
Suspended solids shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Tank capacity shall mean the gallons or volume of commercial waste a transporter's vehicle has the ability to collect at any given time. 
Test manhole shall mean the last discharge point of a pretreatment system and the sampling point for the pretreatment system waste stream. 
Total pump out shall mean the complete removal of any waste generated by a waste generator stored in a pretreatment system on site. 
Transporter shall mean a licensed person or company that collects commercial waste from commercial waste generators. 
Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant." 
Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
WPCF shall mean the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-1, 10-8-79; Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-72. - Violations. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 24-77, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)	No person shall continue any violation hereof beyond the applicable time limit. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-8, 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-73. - Enforcement, right of entry. 
It shall be the duty of the city to enforce the provisions of this article, and in the performance of this duty the appropriate city personnel shall have access to enter any property at any reasonable time as may be necessary for inspection and enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-8, 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-74. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)	Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-7, 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-75. - Use of public sewers required; toilet facilities. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any storm drain or natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)	Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)	The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-2, 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-76. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)	Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 24-75(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(c)	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 24-75(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(d)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(e)	No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-3, 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-77. - Damaging wastewater facilities. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-6, 10-8-79) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 24-78. - Assessments for sewer lines. 
(a)	Assessments shall be levied against affected property or its owners for sewer lines as provided in this section. Sewer lines, at full cost of labor and material, shall be prorated per lot. 
(b)	All such assessments shall be due at the time of completing such construction. Any affected owner may at his option pay twenty-five (25) percent down and the balance in three (3) equal yearly payments of principal plus accrued interest at seven (7) percent provided such owner shall execute a proper lien agreement for same to the city in recordable form properly describing the affected property. 
(c)	Such assessments as herein called for shall create a lien on the affected owner and his property and in case a person is delinquent in payment of same, the same shall be enforced by issuing execution against such delinquent person or his property directed to an officer authorized to execute same who shall levy on the property and conduct a sale in the manner prescribed for sheriffs' sales in this state. 
(d)	The governing body shall have the right to compel citizens to tap on to such service when made available. 
(e)	Sewer lines shall be laid where and when deemed necessary by the governing body with or without a public hearing but all affected owners shall be notified as above set forth concerning water and shall have a right to demand a hearing if any such affected owner desires to be heard. 
(f)	The city administrator shall be responsible for all things needful and necessary to administer and enforce this section, except the field work shall be the responsibility of the person in charge of the water and sewer department. 
(g)	Nothing in this section shall affect any contract between the city and any person or institution. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1(a)—(d), (f)—(h)) 
Sec. 24-79. - Tap fees. 
Sewer tap fees shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council and a schedule of such fees is on file in the office of the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 85-6, § 17-2, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 94-04, § 2, 9-6-94) 
Sec. 24-80. - Rates and meter deposits. 
The rates for sewer service to be charged consumers shall be as prescribed by resolution of the governing body. A schedule is to be maintained in the office of the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 85-4, § 17-3.1, 7-2-85) 
Secs. 24-81—24-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 24-96. - Permit required, classification. 
(a)	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the designated city representative. 
(b)	There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the designated city representative. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and a permit and inspection fee for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(1, 2), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-97. - Liability for costs. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(3), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-98. - Separate connections required, exceptions. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(4), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-99. - Use of old sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the designated city representative, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(5), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-100. - Specifications generally. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(6), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-101. - Point of connection. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(7), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-102. - Connection of surface drainage. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the designated city representative for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(8), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-103. - Conformance to technical regulations. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the designated city representative before installation. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(9), 10-8-79) 
Cross reference— Technical codes adopted, § 6-26. 
Sec. 24-104. - Request for inspection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the designated city representative when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the designated city representative. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(10), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-105. - Excavations. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(11), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-106. - OSHA requirements. 
The installation of all building sewers and connections into the public sewer shall conform with all pertinent OSHA requirements. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-4(12), 10-8-79) 
Secs. 24-107—24-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 24-121. - Unpolluted waters prohibited in sewers. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times and may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the designated city representative. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(1), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-122. - Use of storm sewers, natural outlets. 
Stormwater other than that exempted under section 24-121 and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the designated city representative and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the designated city representative, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(2), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-123. - Prohibited discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)	Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(3), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-124. - Limited discharges. 
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The designated city representative may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability, the designated city representative will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the designated city representative are as follows: 
(1)	Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred sixty (160) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)	Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l. 
(3)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(4)	Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material at the point of discharge exceeds the limits established below: 

 
or any element which in the judgment of the designated city representative, will damage collection facilities or be detrimental to the treatment process. The limits set forth above may be amended if such amendment is deemed necessary to protect the facilities or life or health and/or to comply with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(5)	Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the designated city representative. 
(6)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the designated city representative in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(7)	Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug. 
(8)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(9)	Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(10)	Any waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter or containing more than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter of suspended solids. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(4), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-125. - Discretionary authority of city representative. 
(a)	If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 24-124 and which in the judgment of the designated city representative may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the designated city representative may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes; 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)	Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	If the designated city representative permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the designated city representative. Dilution of incompatible wastes with uncontaminated water is not an acceptable method of waste equalization. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(5), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-126. - Use of interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the designated city representative they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified herein, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the designated city representative and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the designated city representative. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(6), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-127. - Pretreatment standards. 
(a)	All industrial users of the sanitary sewers, discharging incompatible or toxic pollutants, shall meet the requirements of the Federal Pretreatment Standards (40CFR, Part 128) as provided by section 307(b) of Public Law 92-500. In some cases, these pretreatment standards may not be sufficient to protect the operation of treatment works, or to ensure compliance with state and federal regulations. In such cases, the right is reserved to impose more stringent pretreatment standards than those specified in federal regulations. 
(b)	Where treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(7), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-128. - Control structure. 
When required by the designated city representative the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the designated city representative. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(8), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-129. - Measurement, testing standards. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the designated city representative. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(9), 10-8-79) 
Sec. 24-130. - Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. No. 79-7, § 13.2-5(10), 10-8-79) 
DIVISION 4. - COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 24-131. - General provisions; nonapplicability to residential users. 
(a)	This division pertains to fat, oil and grease (hereinafter "FOG"), grit, and any other wastes of commercial origin which may be discharged to the publicly owned treatment works and sanitary sewer. This division shall regulate commercial waste generators only and not residential users. 
(b)	For the purposes of this division, wastes of commercial origin are those generated by restaurants, institution kitchens, and other food service establishments, as well as car maintenance, automobile dealerships, and car/truck wash facilities. All commercial waste generators involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide an approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) pretreatment system such as a grease trap, provided that the excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed. All commercial facilities with vehicle servicing or car washing will be required to provide a pretreatment system such as an oil separator and/or sand trap to remove oil waste prior to discharging to the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-132. - Pretreatment equipment installation, maintenance, and grease disposal requirements. 
(a)	All users involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) removal equipment such as separators or traps, if: 
(1)	The user generates a washwater which contains greater than the quantity of FOG permitted in these regulations, and/or 
(2)	The excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease separator or trap, then said user shall be required to install an oil/grease separator. 
(b)	Oil/grease traps shall be required for commercial and industrial establishments where it has been determined by the designated city representative that they are necessary to prevent discharge to the sewer system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the system. 
(c)	Alternative pretreatment systems include automatic waste removal equipment and shall be used only after evaluation and authorization by the designated city representative. 
(d)	Commercial car and truck washing facilities which discharge to the city sewer shall provide grit and oil removal as described elsewhere in these regulations. 
(e)	All oil/grease separators shall be designed and installed in accordance with city standards. The user shall submit plans to the city for review and comment. The installation shall be subject to the city's inspection prior to placing in service. 
(f)	Grit and oil/grease separators shall be installed in accordance to the current official plumbing code used by the city. 
(g)	When required by the city, the user shall install a suitable manhole on the discharge to the sewer to allow for observation, sampling, and measurement of wastewaters. This manhole shall be installed at the user's expense and shall be maintained to be safe and accessible to the city at all times. 
(h)	It shall be a violation of these regulations when a person: 
(1)	Allows commercial waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health or property to spill, overflow, or be discharged onto public or private property. 
(2)	Allows commercial waste to be removed from a facility under his/her control except by a transporter holding a valid and current license/permit for pumping in the state. 
(3)	Allows commercial waste generated at a facility under his/her control to be disposed of at a site not permitted by the city. 
(4)	Allows commercial waste generated at a facility under his/her control to enter the city sewerage system which exceeds the limitations set forth in sections 24-123 and 24-124. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-133. - Operation and maintenance of pretreatment system. 
(a)	All oil/grease, and grit separators shall be maintained by the user, at the user's expense, in continually efficient operation at all times. The user shall service each separator frequently and repair as necessary, to ensure that the effluent discharge does not exceed the limits set forth in sections 24-123 and 24-124. The user shall maintain records of said service and make available to the designated city representative. 
(b)	It shall constitute a violation of this division to introduce chemicals, acidic, or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils, and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the city sewer line, pump station, or treatment plant. Use of any other substances, including enzymes and special bacteria is solely at the discretion of the user. Prior to the use of any biological products, the user shall inform the city in writing of their intent to add such products to their pretreatment system. 
(c)	The city shall have the authority to prohibit the addition of any substance, including enzymes and bacteria used for maintenance of a grease trap if it is discovered that said substance causes damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the publicly owned treatment works, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential hazard to personnel. 
(d)	If upon inspection, it is determined that a grease trap is in need of cleaning, the only acceptable means shall be to pump out the grease for disposal as provided elsewhere in this document. Applying heavy doses of chemicals, enzymes, or bacteria to the grease trap will not be allowed as a substitute for pumping and removing the material from the trap. 
(e)	Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions to enzymes, special bacteria, or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable grease trap. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-134. - Permits. 
(a)	Construction permit. No portion of a pretreatment system shall be installed, repaired, altered, modified, or replaced until a pretreatment construction permit has been issued by the city. A fee will be required for review of plans. Permits issued for new construction shall become void eighteen (18) months after the date of issuance if the system has not been installed. However, if building construction has commenced, the system construction permit shall be valid for an additional ninety (90) calendar days beyond the eighteen-month expiration date. Permits for system repairs shall become void after ninety (90) calendar days from the date of issuance. A construction or repair permit for a pretreatment system shall be transferred to another person if the transferee files an amended application providing all corrected information and proof of ownership of the property or tenant occupancy within sixty (60) calendar days after the transfer of ownership, and all information pertaining to the sitting, location, and installation conditions or repair of a pretreatment system remains the same. There is no fee associated with the processing to the transfer. The date of the construction or repair permit shall not be amended, but shall run from the date of original issuance prior to the transfer. 
(b)	Construction revision permit. The applicant shall be the permit holder and shall be held responsible for all information supplied to the city. The signed application, site evaluation, and system design plans when required, serve as the basis by which the city determines the issuance of a construction permit. In the event of a change in any information given in the application which served as basis for issuing a construction permit, the permit holder will immediately file an amended application detailing such changed conditions. If the new conditions are determined to be in compliance with city engineering standards, the construction permit shall be amended. If the new conditions are determined to be in noncompliance with the city engineering standards, the permit shall no longer be valid. 
(c)	Commercial waste permit. A permit shall be required by any commercial waste generator discharging to the city sanitary sewer and publicly owned treatment works. The permit will be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance and is not transferable. The permit must be placed in a location visible to inspections. If the owner of a pretreatment system remains the same but the ownership of the building changes, a site tenant is still operating within the permit guidelines. No new building tenant shall open for business until the city has approved the change of tenancy and inspected the pretreatment system to see if it is still within the guidelines of the original operating permit (see section 24-140). 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-135. - Pretreatment inspections. 
(a)	New construction. Before covering with earth and before placing a pretreatment system into service, a person/company installing or constructing any portion of a pretreatment system shall notify the city prior to completion of the construction activities and shall have the system inspected by the city for compliance with the requirements of this division. A final inspection fee will be required. The city shall make every reasonable effort to make a complete inspection of system construction, modification, replacement, or alteration within two (2) working days after notification to the city that the system is ready for inspection. A repair shall be inspected by the city to determine compliance with construction permit standards prior to final covering of the system. If the system constructed is approved by the city, an "inspection approval" notice will be given to the installer. If the system installation does not pass the construction inspection, then the installer shall make all required corrections and notify the city within seven (7) calendar days for a re-inspection of the system. A re-inspection fee shall be charged to the installer for additional inspection(s) if the contractor has failed to correct the items an inspector has required at the preliminary inspection. Final installation approval shall not be granted until the city has confirmed that the installation is in compliance with plans and specifications submitted with the permit application. If no final construction inspection can be documented of the commercial waste generators pretreatment system, then the certificate of occupancy on the project will not be released. 
(b)	Existing pretreatment systems. The city will perform an annual inspection of all pretreatment systems permitted to operate in the city. The inspections will be conducted to make sure the commercial waste generator is following the maintenance criteria set forth in this division and the waste generator is operating under the conditions of the permit. Those facilities found in non-compliance will be required to correct all violations within seven (7) calendar days of notification. However, if the violation requires a repair, replacement, or installation of a pretreatment system, then the commercial waste generator will have forty-five (45) calendar days to comply. All repairs, replacement, and installations will require approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-136. - Location and installation. 
(a)	Pretreatment systems will be located and installed closest to the discharge source of the commercial waste. A subsurface pretreatment system must be located or installed no more than fifty (50) feet from the discharge source. A subsurface pretreatment system installed beyond fifty (50) feet must have approval by the city. 
(b)	Pretreatment systems will be located and installed so that proper maintenance of the system does not create sanitary nuisances or health hazards and does not impact the environment. 
(c)	Pretreatment systems must be located and installed so that they are accessible for maintenance. No heavy kitchen equipment, canisters, dumpsters, or trash compactors can block access to the pretreatment system. 
(d)	Interior grease traps will be installed at the point source such as a 3-4 compartment sink, dishwasher, or any kitchen equipment where grease must be collected prior to discharge to the building waste line. Interior grease traps will be located above the floor. Recessed grease traps must have prior approval for installation. All interior grease traps must have a flow control valve and a vent. The flow control valve shall be placed on the inlet side of the grease trap. The vent line will take all odors out of the building. 
(e)	Pretreatment systems installed and located so as to experience a rusting of parts (e.g., pretreatment system located under a kitchen sink) which may impair the opening of the system for inspection, will require the commercial waste generator to provide access to the system. If the commercial waste generator cannot provide access, then they will be in violation. The inspector can require that the unit be replaced if it has deteriorated from corrosion. 
(f)	Pretreatment systems installed and located on the outside of a building will discharge to the sanitary sewer line. The test manhole is the last discharge point of the pretreatment system before the sanitary sewer. The sanitary sewer connection from the pretreatment system will not be allowed to connect to the site sanitary sewer line by going under or through the building. The connection to the sanitary sewer line must be kept to the exterior of the building structure. The connection from the building to the pretreatment system will be a direct straight line. One (1) ninety or forty-five (45) degree angle will be allowed with a clean out if a straight line is not obtainable. The test manhole will be located a maximum of four (4) feet from the last tank in the pretreatment system and must have an invert in the test manhole. Prefab concrete or brick construction is allowed. 
(g)	All pretreatment systems installed subsurface in multi-level parking decks must be located on the ground level of the structure and must be located so they are accessible for maintenance and inspection. 
(h)	Installation of an alternative interior pretreatment system will be allowed for commercial waste generators where an upgrade, repair, or installation of a pretreatment system is required and a subsurface system is not possible. However, the commercial waste generator must meet the following criteria for an alternative pretreatment system to be installed: 
(1)	The facility must be located in an existing building structure that is fifteen (15) years or older, where written documentation is submitted by a licensed engineer, contractor, or master plumber to verify a subsurface pretreatment system is impossible to install due to existing underground utilities; 
(2)	The facility is not located in new commercial development; 
(3)	The facility provides written documentation by a licensed engineer, contractor, or master plumber that the sanitary sewer tie-in of a subsurface pretreatment system cannot be reached by the installer; and 
(4)	The facility's pretreatment system is found to be inadequate and an alternative system will upgrade the current pretreatment system to bring the facility into compliance. 
(i)	Any subsurface pretreatment system requiring installation of more than one (1) single tank will lace the tanks in tandem and in one (1) single line. The multiple tanks must be installed so the commercial waste from the building will flow from tank to tank. The distance from tank to tank will not be greater than twelve (12) inches. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-137. - Design of pretreatment system. 
Oil water separators, grease traps, and sand traps will be required for commercial and industrial establishments as a pretreatment system where it is determined by the city that they are necessary to prevent oil and grease waste discharge to the sanitary sewer system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the sewer system and the city's publicly owned treatment works. The user shall submit plans to the city for review and comment. The installation shall be subject to the city's inspection prior to placing in service. 
(1)	Subsurface pretreatment systems shall comply with the structural requirements as indicated on the Fulton County standard 671 or 671A and this division. All subsurface pretreatment systems must comply with the engineering standards indicated on the standard detail, as well as the current plumbing code used by the city. 
(2)	For the sizing of pretreatment systems by specific generators source, refer to generator source charts, tables I and II. Systems currently installed will not change unless the pretreatment system is found to be: 
a.	Inadequate for the facility's current operation. 
b.	In violation due to a commercial waste generator failing to provide documentation for maintenance of the current system and an inspection reveals that an upgrade or repair is required. 
c.	Located in a spill area and the commercial waste generator has failed to maintain the pretreatment system, which results in a fine from the city, or clean up is required and an inspection reveals the current system is inadequate or in need of repair. 
d.	Installed incorrectly and not per the plumbing code used by the city or engineering standards. The existing system shall be corrected where possible. If unable to correct, then the system must be replaced. 
(3)	Subsurface pretreatment systems will have manhole covers over the inlet and outlet of the system (refer to standard detail 671). The concrete lid of the tank will have circular openings for the placement of manhole covers. The manhole covers must be at least two (2) feet in diameter. All openings on the pretreatment system will be core drilled. 
(4)	Any three thousand (3,000) gallon pretreatment system can be installed in two (2) sections provided the center section has been sealed properly so that no leakage can occur. The maximum size for any single tank installation will be three thousand (3,000) gallons on commercial sites where a greater system is not required for spill containment. All three thousand (3,000) gallon tanks shall have a minimum of two (2) manhole openings for access to the tanks for cleaning and inspection. The subsurface pretreatment system will be made of prefab concrete tanks or their equivalent and will be a solid continuous structure where no sealing or binding of the middle section of the tank is allowed. The tank cannot be fabricated in two (2) sections if the tank is less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. A baffle wall is required in the tanks and the baffle wall must be fabricated as a permanent fixture. A slide structure will not be allowed as baffle wall. A three-inch to five-inch diameter hole in the baffle wall must have a PVC elbow pipe turned down a maximum two (2) feet from the bottom of the tank (refer to standard detail 671). 
(5)	A subsurface pretreatment system will have a standard manhole suitable for observation, sampling, and measurement of wastewater. This manhole shall be installed at the user's expense and shall be maintained to be safe and accessible to the city at all times. This manhole is called the test manhole and is considered part of the overall pretreatment system (see Fulton County standard 650). 
(6)	Each installed subsurface pretreatment systems must be certified as a grease trap or an oil water separator. A septic system will not be allowed in lieu of the required pretreatment system. Interior pretreatment systems must have PDI certification and the gallon (GPM) capacity must be labeled on the unit. To verify the type and size of the tank purchased, an inspector can request a copy of the invoice for the pretreatment system installed. 
(7)	All pretreatment systems that are subsurface will be brought to finished grade using pre-cast concrete cones. Brick work will also be allowed if the depth is no more than four (4) feet to reach grade. The depth of the pretreatment system will determine how the brick work should be built. The standard core hole in the top of a pre-cast pretreatment system lid is two (2) feet. The brick work will be three (3) feet in diameter around the core opening. The three-foot base will allow entry to the pretreatment system for maintenance. When using bricks, once eighty (80) percent of the height has been achieved to the two-foot manhole opening, the user must corbel in the brickwork in small increments (see Fulton County standard 650). 
(8)	An alternate interior pretreatment system shall be used only after evaluation and authorization by the city. Any alternative pretreatment system unit authorized by the city for use must have product support for maintenance and operation of the system. The equipment must be available for sale and the supply must be readily available for installation. The use of an alternative system will require established procedures for routine maintenance, operational surveillance, and environmental monitoring to assure the system continues to function properly. Any fees incurred for quality assurance of this unit will be the total responsibility of the commercial waste generator. The sizing of the grease trap will be based on the manufacturer's recommendations, but it must be equivalent to a subsurface pretreatment system gallon capacity where required. 
(9)	A grease trap is used for the collection of kitchen waste discharge only. It cannot be used to collect discharge from can wash areas, dumpsters, mop sinks, food grinders, food coolers, or floor drains in mechanical rooms or bathrooms. Commercial waste generators that have micro-brewery facilities may be subject to additional discharge requirements (see Appendix B3 Food Service Piping Layout). 
(10)	Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions of enzymes, special bacteria, or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable pretreatment system. 
(11)	It shall constitute a violation of this division to introduce chemicals and/or acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils, and grease to the extent that such material later solidifies in the city sewer lines or pump stations or in the publicly owned treatment works. If a commercial waste generator uses enzymes and bacteria for pretreatment maintenance and it is discovered that said substances causes damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the publicly owned treatment works, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential health hazard, then these additives will be prohibited. Use of any other substances, including special enzymes and bacteria is solely at the discretion of the commercial waste generator. 
(12)	Grit and sand traps and oil water separators shall be installed in accordance to the current official plumbing code used by the city engineering standards (refer to the commercial waste generator source table II in this division). 
(13)	Any strip retail shopping center or office building showing subsurface pretreatment systems at designated buildings or structures will only be allowed discharge by a single tenant or food service to that system. No multiple users will be allowed. The only exception to this condition is a shopping mall with a food court where pretreatment systems are installed and maintained by the mall corporation or management leasing. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-138. - Maintenance of pretreatment systems. 
(a)	Pretreatment systems shall be maintained by the commercial waste generator at its expense, to assure continually efficient operation at all times. The commercial waste generator shall maintain records of said service and make available all records to the city upon request (refer to the manifest section of this division). The commercial waste generator must service its pretreatment system frequently or repair its system to maintain the following: 
(1)	A twenty-five (25) percent retention capacity rule (see explanation below). [3] 
(2)	A top sludge cap less than two (2) feet in tank. 
(3)	A suspended solids content of less than two (2) feet on the bottom of the tank. 
(4)	A pretreatment system able to maintain a daily discharge limit of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l to sanitary sewer. 
(5)	A pretreatment system where no sludge deposits of grease or oil waste accumulate in a test manhole or create a grease/oil waste stream to the sanitary sewer. 
(6)	A pretreatment system that does not create any obnoxious odors and poses no threat to public health and welfare. 
(7)	A pretreatment system that does not cause back-ups to kitchen sinks or any interior kitchen or building plumbing. 
(8)	A pretreatment system that causes no manhole overflows and no accumulation of oil/grease in the city sanitary sewer system and does not affect the water quality of the city's publicly owned treatment works facilities. 
(b)	The following maintenance schedule shall be required for pretreatment systems operating in the city: 
(1)	Subsurface systems (grease traps, oil water separators, sand traps). 

 
(2)	Interior systems (grease traps, oil separators, sand traps). 

 
(3)	Automatic grease recovery system (grease traps). 

 
Commercial pretreatment inspectors shall have the authority to adjust any facility's maintenance schedule if upon inspection it is determined that the maintenance schedule of the pretreatment system is not controlling the discharge of grease/oil waste to the sanitary sewer. 
(c)	New commercial waste generators that are permitted for new pretreatment installation shall be required to provide the city with a notarized statement for the maintenance of their pretreatment system based on the maintenance schedule stated in this division. 
(d)	Commercial waste generators located in an area that has experience a spill where a city sanitary sewer system has been impacted or a manhole has overflowed due to grease/oil accumulation must provide the city with a maintenance schedule to prevent this from occurring again. If the maintenance schedule is found to be inadequate or does not adhere to the maintenance schedule required by the city for that specific pretreatment system, the city shall have the right to amend that commercial waste generator's maintenance schedule to control any further commercial waste discharge that could impact the sanitary sewer system, manhole, or pretreatment system. 
(e)	Any commercial waste generator(s) found to be in violation for failure to maintain their pretreatment system in a spill area shall be assessed one-half (½) the cost for clean up and/or fined by the city due to commercial waste impacting the environment or sanitary sewer system. Additional fines may be imposed by the state. 
(f)	Any commercial waste generator found not adhering to any maintenance standards as established in this division will be in violation. 
(g)	Any commercial waste generator requesting a deviation from a pretreatment system maintenance schedule as stated in this division shall submit their request in writing. The written request must include documentation that verifies that the pretreatment system has been operating within the guidelines for a year as stated in subsection (a) of this section and the modification of the maintenance schedule will not change the compliance status of the pretreatment system. 
(h)	If a commercial waste generator operates a food service in its establishment but the food service is not considered the generator's main business income, the generator will be required to cease its food operation if it violates any part of this division. Once the generator has come into compliance the food service operation can resume. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— The twenty-five percent rule requires that the depth of oil and grease (floating and settled) in a trap shall not be equal to or greater than twenty-five percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of the trap is determined by measuring the internal depth of the tank. If the tank is measured with more than two feet of floating top solids or more than two feet of settled solids, the tank is in violation. 

Sec. 24-139. - Manifests for commercial waste disposal. 
(a)	A commercial waste generator shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from its facility without a current commercial waste hauler permit issued by the state or local governing authority. In addition, a generator: 
(1)	Shall not permit a transporter to remove commercial waste from the generator's premises until the transporter has presented a non-hazardous manifest to the generator to document pumping activity. This manifest will require signatures from the generator, transporter, and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The manifest should be a multi-copy form. 
(2)	Shall ensure that the manifest form used to document the transportation and disposal of commercial waste generated in the city contains the following information at a minimum: 
a.	Generator information: 
1.	Name and physical address of facility; 
2.	Volume of waste pumped; 
3.	Date and time of pumping activity; 
4.	Signature of authorized representative; and 
5.	Print name. 
b.	Transporter information: 
1.	Name and physical address of company; 
2.	County or issued commercial waste FOG permit; 
3.	Driver certification number; 
4.	Volume of waste pumped; 
5.	Name and signature of driver; and 
6.	Print name. 
c.	Disposer information: 
1.	Name and physical address of facility; 
2.	State, county, city, or federal permit number of site; 
3.	Volume of waste received; 
4.	Signature of authorized representative; and 
5.	Print name. 
(3)	Upon receipt of the completed copy of the manifest from the transporter, shall mail a copy of the manifest within five (5) days to the following: 
[Insert address] 
(4)	Shall accurately complete and sign the generator information section of the manifest to ensure that the transporter has noted on the manifest the number of gallons of waste removed and verify that the generator information is correct. 
(5)	Shall keep a copy of all manifests for a period of three (3) years on site and shall make said copies available for inspection by the city. 
(6)	Shall report any spills to the city upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams, or the ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the city of a spill will constitute a violation and fines will be assessed to the commercial waste generator as well as the transporter. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-140. - Commercial waste permit issuance. 
An annual permit will be required for all pretreatment systems, both existing and new. A fee will be charged for this permit. The permit fee will be based on the type of pretreatment system at the site. Failure to apply for a commercial waste permit shall be a violation. The generator's environmental health department food service permit may be suspended until the permit is obtained. 
(1) All commercial waste permits shall be issued annually from January 1 to March 31. Any existing facility obtaining a permit after March 31 will be charged a twenty-five (25) percent penalty fee. A new facility opening after the annual permit period will not pay a penalty unless it has been determined that the facility has been opened for more than thirty (30) days. After the facility has been opened for thirty (30) days, the twenty-five (25) percent penalty fee shall apply. A new facility applying for a commercial waste permit after the permitting period will not pay a prorated fee. The following fee schedule details the cost of an annual permit based on the type of pretreatment system. 
Annual Permit Fee Schedule per Facility 

 
(2)	Permit conditions shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.	Permit duration; 
b.	Permit fee; 
c.	Permit transfer; 
d.	Frequency of inspections; 
e.	Pretreatment requirements; 
f.	Maintenance requirements; 
g.	Compliance schedules; 
h.	Requirements for maintenance records and submission of reports; 
i.	Right of entry; 
j.	Review of upgrades or repairs of a pretreatment system; and 
k.	Other conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinances, laws, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-141. - Abandonment of systems. 
(a)	Wherever the use of a subsurface pretreatment system is discontinued due to a business closing or relocation, and the system is connected to the sanitary sewer, the commercial waste generator shall follow the following procedure: 
(1)	Contact the commercial pretreatment inspection group (phone #) before vacating the property; 
(2)	Resolve all outstanding violations; and 
(3)	Clean the pretreatment system before vacating the business and submit a manifest to the city to substantiate the cleaning of the system. 
(b)	If the commercial waste generator fails to clean the pretreatment system and/or resolve outstanding violations it shall be considered a violation of this division. Management or property leasing will be notified. No commercial waste generator shall be allowed to occupy the facility until it is brought into compliance. If the existing pretreatment system is not adequate based on the new business operation, then the new commercial waste generator shall upgrade the pretreatment system. If the building or tenant space vacated will not be used for another commercial waste generator, then management leasing or the building owner shall follow the following tank abandonment procedures: 
(1)	Collapse tank or fill pretreatment system with sand; 
(2)	Seal over manholes so that they are no longer accessible; 
(3)	Disconnect or reroute the kitchen waste line from the building to the pretreatment system; and 
(4)	Contact the city to inspect the abandoned system prior to a new business opening. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-142. - Construction prohibitions. 
It shall be the responsibility of persons under this rule to see that work contracted for and performed by them or under their supervision is carried out in conformance with the requirements of the city engineering standards and this division. Persons contracted for installation of pretreatment systems must be licensed contractors or master plumbers in the state and their licenses must be current. Inspectors shall have the authority to request a copy of the license when approving all pretreatment system installations. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-143. - Construction violations. 
The following will constitute a construction violation: 
(1)	No contractor shall construct, alter, modify, repair, or install a pretreatment system without receiving a permit from the city. 
(2)	No contractor shall install, modify, or repair a pretreatment system which will violate standards set forth in this division, without evidence that a variance has been granted. 
(3)	No contractor shall perform services which will cause or increase the likelihood of pollution to the sanitary sewer, storm drains, or publically owned treatment works and/or pose a threat to the health and safety of the public. 
(4)	Each contractor shall be responsible for maintaining records of services as required by this division and shall provide a copy of those records to the city upon request. An example of this requirement would be an invoice verifying the purchase of the pretreatment system. 
(5)	It shall be a violation of this division for a contractor to initiate work to install, upgrade, or repair a system where no permit has been issued by the city. It shall also be a violation of this division if a permit is issued after construction is started but prior to completion of the contracted work or if no site inspections are performed. 
(6)	It shall be a violation of this division if contracted work is completed without a permit having been issued or if no permit application was received until contracted work was completed, resulting in missed inspections. 
(7)	Failure to call for required inspections shall be a violation of this division. 
(8)	Abandoning, without good cause, a project in which a contractor is engaged or is under contractual obligation to perform shall be a violation of this division. The failure of a contractor to perform work without just cause for ninety (90) consecutive days shall create a presumption that the contractor has abandoned the project. 
(9)	Gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct which causes monetary or other harm to a customer or physical harm to any person shall be a violation of this division. An example of such a violation would be the illegal disposal of a generator's waste when repairing a pretreatment system. 
(10)	It shall be a violation of this division if a pretreatment system is installed by someone other than a licensed contractor or master plumber. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-144. - Notification of violation. 
When the designated city representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a commercial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the designated city representative may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the designated city representative. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the designated city representative to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-145. - Violations and penalties. 
When the designated city representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a commercial waste permit or any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the designated city representative may issue a citation to such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(1)	Unpaid citations shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of twenty-five (25) percent. Failure by the generator to pay a designated citation thirty (30) business days after the citation has been issued shall result in the revocation of the generator's commercial waste permit. 
(2)	Issuance of a citation shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action. 
(3)	The following shall be considered violations of this division and the responsible person or company will be assessed fines accordingly: 
a.	It shall be a violation of this division for a licensed contractor, engineer, or plumber to install, modify, or repair a pretreatment system without a pretreatment permit or to work on the installation of a pretreatment system and obtain a permit after work has commenced. It shall also be a violation if no inspections are performed. 
b.	It shall be a violation of this division for a commercial waste generator to have a pretreatment system installed without submitting plans for review. It shall also be a violation if installation of a system is completed and no permit application is received or on file and if no final inspections of the project are performed. 
c.	Failure to call for required inspection(s) when a renovation or upgrade of a pretreatment system is required shall be a violation of this division. 
d.	A commercial waste generator shall be in violation of this division if it fails to maintain its pretreatment system. 
e.	A commercial waste generator shall be in violation of this division if it fails to provide the city with a manifest or maintenance documentation for its pretreatment system. 
f.	A commercial waste generator shall be in violation of this division if it fails to inform the city that a spill has occurred during pumping of a pretreatment system and the spill impacts the sanitary sewer, storm drain, or environment. 
g.	A commercial waste generator shall be in violation of this division if it fails to apply for the required commercial waste permit for a pretreatment system in the city. 
(4)	Any violations do negate their existence. The city shall have the right to use other laws that may be applicable when determining violations. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Sec. 24-146. - Citations and administrative appeal. 
(a)	Citations: 
(1)	Citations shall be issued when the commercial waste generator fails to correct the same violation after a notice of violation has been issued and the commercial waste generator demonstrates willful neglect or non-compliance with this division. Any citations issued shall be paid in thirty (30) calendar days from the date of issuance. A citation must be in writing and must describe the particular nature of the violation, including specific references to the provisions of this division violated and the time frame for correction. Refusal of the citation will not negate its issuance. 
(b)	Administrative appeal: 
(1)	Generators desiring to dispute citations must file a written request for the designated city representative to reconsider the citation along with full payment of the citation amount within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of issuance. Where a request has merit, the designated city representative may convene a hearing on the matter. If the citation has been paid and the designated city representative rules in favor of the generator, all money shall be returned to the generator. If the recipient fails to execute its right to contest the citation, the city will conclude that the recipient has waived its right and the recipient must pay the initial citation fine and/or the maximum fine. 
(2)	The city may reduce or waive the fine imposed by the citation after consideration of the gravity of the violation, the recipient's attempts at correcting the violation, and the commercial waste generator's history of previous violations. However, violations that occur due to a spill or an illegal discharge to the city sanitary sewer system will not be waived or reduced. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 12-1-08) 
Secs. 24-147—24-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Littering, § 14-52. 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motorized vehicles shall mean automobiles, trucks and other motorized vehicles located on public or private property whose ownership is unknown. 
Bulk container shall mean a large (two-, three-, four- or six-cubic yard) metal container of a type approved by the utilities superintendent. 
Certified agency shall mean one licensed by Fulton County, Georgia, and permitted by the Fulton County Department of Public Health, for territory in Fulton County; and by Coweta County and the Coweta County Department of Public Health, for territory in Coweta County; to collect and dispose of solid waste material. Publicly operated collection and disposal activities need not be licensed but must meet standards established by the respective county departments of public health. 
Construction wastes shall mean scrap lumber, pipe, plaster, cement and other construction materials from new or remodeled structures. 
Demolition wastes shall mean lumber, pipes, brick, masonry and other construction materials from razed buildings and other structures. 
Food service establishment shall mean establishments for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes, but is not limited to, restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short order cafes; luncheonettes; taverns; lunchrooms; places manufacturing, wholesaling, or retailing sandwiches or salads; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; food carts; itinerant restaurants; industrial cafeterias; catering establishments; food vending machines and vehicles and operation connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called. 
Garbage shall mean organic, putrescible wastes; wastes from the preparation, cooking and serving of food; market wastes; wastes from handling, storage and sale of produce; garbage shall also include dead or decayed animals. 
Individual container, disposable, shall mean a watertight container constructed of either plastic, paper, or other material as approved by the utilities superintendent. 
Individual container, nondisposable, shall mean a watertight receptacle of a solid and durable grade metal, plastic or rubber or other such material as may be approved by the utilities superintendent. 
Junk shall mean any appliance, vehicle or large household item, except a motorized vehicle, that is discarded or is in a state of disrepair which precludes further use of such item. 
Junked motorized vehicles shall mean automobiles, trucks and other motorized vehicles located on public or private property which have been discarded or are in a state of disrepair which precludes further use. 
Rubbish shall mean any nonputrescible, large, combustible or noncombustible item of solid waste that will not fit properly into an approved thirty-two-gallon solid waste container. The term "rubbish" may include, but is not limited to, the following kinds of materials: 
(1)	Combustible materials such as tied and bundled paper and cardboard, wood, lumber, tree branches, bedding, street refuse, wood furniture and other large combustible items. 
(2)	Noncombustible materials such as large metals, metal furniture, large appliances, and other large noncombustible items. 
Solid waste and/or refuse shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following types of wastes: garbage, rubbish, trash, abandoned and/or junked automobiles, demolition wastes, construction wastes, junk and special wastes. 
Special wastes shall mean hazardous solids and liquids, explosives, pathological wastes and radioactive materials. 
Trash shall mean any nonputrescible, small, combustible or noncombustible item of solid waste normally generated as household refuse or from around the premises which can be properly and safely fitted into an approved solid waste container without hindrance to the normal collection service and personnel provided by the department of public works or other certified agency. The term trash may include, but is not limited to, the following kinds of materials: 
(1)	Combustible materials such as paper, paper and cardboard boxes, wood, excelsior, yard trimmings, and all other small combustible items. 
(2)	Noncombustible materials such as metal cans, glass, crockery, small appliances, toys and any other small, noncombustible items. 
Unauthorized accumulation of solid waste shall mean the storage or accumulation on any premises in the city of solid wastes, as defined herein, in such a manner as to create unsanitary conditions as determined by the respective county departments of public health; or to create fire hazards, as determined by the fire marshal; or to cause offensive or obnoxious odors; or to provide a breeding place for insects or harboring place for vermin; or in any way which adversely affects the health, safety and welfare of the public as established by the appropriate and applicable standards of respective counties. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 24-152. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be accomplished by the utilities superintendent, city police chief, and officers of the respective county departments of public health. 
(b)	The city police chief and the respective county departments of public health are each severally responsible for and authorized to designate personnel to enforce the provisions hereof and to prosecute violators in the municipal court of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2) 
Sec. 24-153. - Collection and disposal of construction and demolition wastes from private property. 
(a)	The city shall not be responsible for the collecting and hauling of construction wastes or demolition wastes originating from private property preliminary to, during, or subsequent to the construction of new, remodeled or renovated structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner, lessee or tenant of said property or the contractor. 
(b)	No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for multifamily, commercial or industrial developments until the aforesaid material is removed by the owner or contractor. 
(c)	Before dirt, rock or plaster may be deposited on private property, permission of the owner thereof must first be obtained. When such material or other solid waste material may be so deposited for the purpose of disposal or providing fills, it must be done and completed in accordance with the direction and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5) 
Sec. 24-154. - Collection and disposal of special wastes. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed with material to be collected by the city any acid, corrosive or explosive material, inflammable liquids, or any other dangerous material of any kind. The city will not be responsible for the collection of such material or its disposal. Disposal of such materials may be arranged through the fire marshal. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6) 
Sec. 24-155. - Collection and disposal of dead animals. 
Collection personnel may enter private property, houses, and other structures at the request of the owner or occupant for the purpose of removing small dead animals. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6) 
Sec. 24-156. - Unauthorized accumulations of solid waste and littering prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes or alleys or into any storm sewer, catch basin, gutter, drainage ditch or any vacant lot or undeveloped property, any solid waste matter. 
(b)	No person shall deposit on, bury in, or cause to be deposited on, or buried in, any land, public square, street, alley, lane, vacant or unoccupied lot, or into any lake or watercourse, any noxious filth, odorous or offensive liquid, or solid waste material, or to place or keep such material within the limits of this city except in approved solid waste containers. The unauthorized accumulation of solid wastes as defined herein is prohibited. 
(c)	No person shall permit any solid wastes to remain on any private property for which they have responsible charge as lessee, tenant, owner or occupier except stored and handled for removal as provided herein. 
(d)	The burning of solid waste in a landfill or sanitary landfill is prohibited as set forth in chapter 270-5-26, rules and regulations for solid waste collection and disposal of the state department of public health. 
(e)	No person, including any governmental agency, shall convey or cause to be conveyed upon the public streets, alleys or lanes, any solid waste except when such solid waste is secured in such a manner to prevent such waste from falling or being blown from such vehicle while in transit and protected in such a manner to avoid odors and leakage of liquids onto the public right-of-way. Hopper drains on all collection vehicles must be closed while traveling on the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6) 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 24-157. - Collection and disposal of abandoned and/or junked motorized vehicles and unauthorized accumulation of solid wastes. 
(a)	Abandoned and/or junked motorized vehicles. The city will not provide for the collection of abandoned motorized vehicles. 
(b)	Removal of unauthorized accumulation of solid wastes. The director of the respective county departments of public health may direct the city to enter private and/or public property for the purpose of removing unauthorized accumulations of solid waste. The respective county departments of public health shall order the removal of such unauthorized wastes when the owner is a nonresident of the county, with no agent or representative in the county, and such owner cannot be served with notice or summons, so as to subject him to punishment by the recorder. The health officer, or one (1) of his assistants, shall notify such owner by mail, directing that the unauthorized accumulated solid wastes on his premises be removed so as to comply herewith. If within ten (10) days from the date of mailing the notice the owner fails to comply with the notice and this section, the director of the department of public works shall have the accumulated solid waste removed, charging the total amount of the cost thereof to the owner, and such amount shall constitute a lien against the lot, as of the date of such work, and if such amount is not paid within thirty (30) days after completion of the work, the director of the department of finance shall issue execution against the particular real estate for which the service was rendered, and against the owner thereof, whereupon such real estate shall be levied on, advertised and sold under such execution, as in cases of levy and sale under executions for street improvement assessments due Fulton County, with the same procedure, including defendant's right to defense by affidavit of illegality and the right of the respective counties to purchase at the sale. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9) 
Sec. 24-158. - Collection and transportation equipment. 
(a)	All equipment used for the collection and transportation of refuse shall be so designed as to prevent the escape of any refuse therefrom. Such equipment shall have enclosed bodies, and be watertight, designed so as to prevent the escape of any liquid. All surfaces of collection and transportation equipment coming in contact with garbage or organic industrial waste shall be smooth, nonabsorbent, and in good repair. Only equipment approved by the utilities superintendent may be used in the collection and transportation of refuse. 
(b)	All equipment used in the collection and transportation of refuse shall be thoroughly washed and treated with an approved insecticide as often as deemed necessary to prevent fly breeding or odor nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11) 
Sec. 24-159. - Unauthorized activities of collection personnel. 
Garbage and refuse collection personnel are not permitted to enter houses and buildings for the collection of refuse, nor shall they accept any money or other things of value for their services from persons served. However, collection personnel may enter private property, houses and other structures at the request of the owner or occupant, for the purpose of removing dead animals. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11) 
Sec. 24-160. - Procedures for handling citizens' requests for service and/or complaints. 
Citizens' complaints and requests concerning the collection and disposal of solid wastes within the city, and/or all other provisions of this article shall be handled and treated in the following manner: 
(1)	Request for service and/or first complaints about service shall be directed to the collection department. 
(2)	Second complaints and/or all major grievances and complaints about service shall be directed to the office of the utilities superintendent. The utilities superintendent or his agent shall receive and process the citizen complaints pertaining to the collection and disposal of solid waste or refuse as specified and defined in this chapter. 
(3)	The utilities superintendent or his agent shall investigate each citizen's complaint and report the results back to the citizen making such complaint. The results of each complaint shall be reported in writing and shall be made a matter of public record and maintained within the utilities superintendent's office for a minimum of three (3) years from the date of initiation of such complaint. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11) 
Sec. 24-161. - Trash pick up rates, etc. 
Trash pickup rates shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council and a schedule of such rates is on file in the office of the city administrator. Trash pickup shall be accomplished under the direction of the city; and the more pressing business of the city, as determined by the appropriate authority, shall be accomplished before any trash pickup is accomplished. The appropriate city authority has both the right and/or the duty to refuse to pick up any material deemed dangerous by such authority. For good cause, any and all trash may be refused pickup by the appropriate authority. 
(Code 1977, § 14-14; Ord. No. 84-3, 5-9-84; Ord. No. 94-04, § 3, 9-6-94) 
Sec. 24-162. - Garbage rates. 
The governing body shall have authority to establish and modify from time to time by resolution a schedule of rates to be charged residential and commercial customers for garbage pick up. 
(Ord. No. 84-3, § 14-15, 5-9-84; Ord. No. 85-3, 7-2-85) 
Sec. 24-163. - Franchises. 
(a)	Authority. The governing body shall have the authority to grant the right, privilege and franchise to remove and dispose of solid waste within all zoning districts of the city. The franchise, authority or permit granted shall extend for a period not to exceed three (3) calendar years. 
(b)	Fees. The grantee of a franchise to remove and dispose of solid waste shall pay to the city a fee in the amount of ten (10) percent of the total monthly billing collected. This fee shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of each month for the collection of solid waste the preceding month. If the franchise fee shall be in arrears in whole or in part for fifteen (15) or more days, the governing body shall have the option to cancel the franchise. 
(c)	Records. All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the city and the collection of bills shall be made available for inspection and audit by the administrative officer or his designee within thirty (30) days after any request for such inspection or audit. 
(Ord. No. 89-04, § 14-15, 6-5-89) 
Sec. 24-164. - Recyclable trash. 
(a)	All residents of the City of Palmetto are required to separate the following items of trash into a designated bin for curbside pickup: 
(1)	Newspapers; 
(2)	Aluminum cans and aluminum products (which shall have been emptied of all contents, both liquid and solid); 
(3)	Glass products (which shall have been emptied of all contents, both liquid and solid); and 
(4)	Plastics (which shall have been emptied of all contents, both liquid and solid). 
(b)	A recycling bin will be distributed to each residential dwelling unit for use by the inhabitants thereof. A deposit of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged to each resident for each additional bin issued, refundable upon the return of the bin in good condition. 
(c)	Residents of Palmetto shall be punished in the municipal court of the City of Palmetto by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by any combination thereof, for failing to comply with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(d)	Current fee schedules and pickup schedules will be kept on file in city hall, and are subject to change at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-03, 6-1-92) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-03, enacted June 1, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion as § 24-164 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 24-165—24-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 24-181. - Generally. 
Specifications and requirements for the handling of solid waste and the location, screening, maintenance and installation requirements of individual disposable and nondisposable and bulk containers shall be as prescribed in this division. It shall be the duty of the owner and/or occupant of all residential, commercial or industrial premises to store, handle and dispose of all solid wastes according to the provisions prescribed herein. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4) 
Sec. 24-182. - Residential uses. 
(a)	Single-family and two-family structures. Each household shall provide itself with a sufficient number of approved nondisposable and/or disposable individual containers to adequately and properly store all solid waste except rubbish and/or junk as established herein, until removed by the city, or other certified agency. The use of individual disposable and nondisposable containers shall be governed by the specifications as set forth in this division. Although individual disposable containers may be used, nondisposable containers shall, at all times, be protected from weather conditions, animals, children, and objects that may cause the contents of such containers to be littered. No items shall be placed within plastic bags that could cause injury to the collection personnel. 
(b)	Multifamily structures. The owner or his agent of each multifamily (three (3) or more units) structure or group thereof shall provide its tenants with sufficient number of either individual nondisposable or bulk containers to adequately and properly store all garbage and trash until removed by the sanitation department of the city, or other certified agency. Rubbish and/or junk shall be placed adjacent to the containers for collection. The use of individual nondisposable and/or bulk containers shall be governed by the specifications as set forth in this division. 
(c)	Compactors. The use of volume reducing equipment such as home compactors, and other such equipment, is encouraged in residential use areas. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3(1)) 
Sec. 24-183. - Commercial uses. 
(a)	The owner, or his agent or tenant of each business or groups of businesses shall provide itself or themselves with sufficient number of approved individual disposable, individual nondisposable, or bulk containers to adequately and properly store all garbage and trash until removed by the sanitation department of the city, or other certified agency. Rubbish and/or junk shall be placed adjacent to the containers for collection and except as herein further provided. The use of individual disposable or nondisposable or bulk containers shall be governed by the specifications as set forth in this division. Outdoor storage of all materials shall be governed by the fencing requirements of the zoning ordinance. Food service establishments shall use plastic bags as liners in all individual solid waste containers and shall place all garbage in plastic bags securely tied before placing such garbage in bulk containers. 
(b)	The use of volume reducing equipment, such as compactors, shredders, and other such equipment, is encouraged in commercial use areas. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3(2)) 
Sec. 24-184. - Industrial uses. 
(a)	The owner or his agent of each industry shall provide that industry with a sufficient number of approved individual disposable or nondisposable, or bulk containers to adequately and properly store all garbage and trash until removed by the sanitation department of the city, or other certified agency. Rubbish and/or junk shall be placed adjacent to containers for collection and as herein further provided. The use of individual and/or bulk containers shall be governed by the specifications as set forth in this division. Outdoor storage of all materials shall be governed by the fencing requirements of the zoning ordinance. Food service establishments shall use plastic bags as liners in all individual solid waste containers, and shall place all garbage in plastic bags securely tied before placing such garbage in bulk containers. 
(b)	The use of volume reducing equipment, such as garbage grinders, compactors, shredders and other such equipment, is encouraged in industrial use areas. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3) 
Sec. 24-185. - Individual disposable and nondisposable containers generally. 
(a)	Individual nondisposable solid waste containers that have deteriorated to the extent of having sharp or jagged edges, capable of causing injury to collection personnel, or to such extent that the lid will not fit tightly or securely, or that it is not watertight, will be condemned at the discretion of the city or its agents. In order to condemn privately owned solid waste containers, the agents of the city shall attach a red notification tag to the container one (1) pickup time prior to actual pickup and disposal of such tagged container. If such tagged container is used for a second time for solid waste storage after the red notification tag was placed on the container, such container may be picked up and disposed of by the agents of the city. 
(b)	The absence of regular collection service due to holidays, inaccessible privately owned roads, or work stoppages shall not in any manner relieve the owners and/or occupants of any property from complying with the provisions of this article. 
(c)	Individual nondisposable and disposable solid waste containers located below ground shall be prohibited from use in all residential, commercial and industrial areas. This provision shall not be retroactive. 
(d)	Collection of large, bulky rubbish and junk, including tree limbs, which has not been removed during the regular scheduled collection because of its bulky size, shall be arranged by the owner or occupant of the premises by telephone with the city. Those waste items which are too large to be safely handled by the equipment and/or personnel of the city must be collected and transported for disposal by the owner or occupant. 
(e)	All leaves, grass clippings, pine needles, and similar yard trimmings shall be placed in containers and will be removed on the scheduled days of collection. All branches, limbs and shrubbery shall be cut into lengths of four (4) feet or less and no single piece shall exceed twelve (12) inches in diameter and will be removed on request as defined in paragraph (d) above, except that commercial tree and shrubbery firms and clearing and grading contractors shall remove their own debris. 
(f)	In cases where the owner of a building having two (2) or more tenants, furnishes janitorial service for each dwelling unit including the placing of containers at a central collection point, it shall be the duty of the janitor or other person charged by the owner with this responsibility to perform such service in compliance with this article; however, this shall not relieve the occupants of such dwelling units of their responsibility under the provisions of this article. Where two (2) or more dwelling units in any building or other premises are occupied and where janitorial service is not furnished, or in any case where the placing of containers for collection does not clearly indicate the premises from which they come, the occupants of such dwelling unit shall plainly mark their containers for identification and ownership. This may be accomplished by marking the solid waste containers with the name, or the house or dwelling number in which the owner resides. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4(1)) 
Sec. 24-186. - Individual disposal containers. 
(a)	Disposable individual containers shall not exceed a capacity of thirty-two (32) gallons nor weigh more than one hundred (100) pounds. Disposable individual containers shall be constructed of plastic (copolymer, ethylene plastics, polyethylene) or two-ply, fifty-pound wet strength extensible kraft paper. Disposable containers shall meet the specifications for plastic and/or paper refuse bags as established by the National Sanitation Foundation, listed above, and the utilities superintendent. All specifications may be obtained from the department of public works. 
(b)	Rubbish and trash (nonputrescible materials) may be placed in used cardboard boxes and placed next to the approved solid waste container for collection by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4(2)) 
Sec. 24-187. - Individual nondisposable containers. 
Individual nondisposable solid waste containers shall be a watertight receptacle of not less than fifteen (15) gallons or more than thirty-two (32) gallons capacity, weigh not more than one hundred (100) pounds when loaded, and equipped with suitable handles on the outside and a tight-fitting cover of like material equipped with a handle. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4(3)) 
Sec. 24-188. - Bulk containers. 
Bulk solid waste containers shall be of a solid grade metal of either a two-, three-, four- or six-cubic yard capacity equipped with lids and drains. Containers shall be of a type and variety as approved by the utilities superintendent. A certificate for the location and use of a bulk container in either multifamily, commercial or industrial use areas shall be issued to an applicant by the utilities superintendent, provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)	Containers shall be of a variety and size approved by the utilities superintendent. 
(2)	Containers shall be located entirely on private property, off the public right-of-way. 
(3)	Containers shall be easily accessible to garbage collection vehicles at all times. 
(4)	Containers used for garbage shall be located on a four-inch thick concrete pad of appropriate size to handle the size container and be served by hot and cold running water and drainage into a sanitary or combination sewer; or provision be maintained for steam cleaning with access to the sewerage system or such other provisions approved by the utilities superintendent. 
(5)	All containers shall be maintained by the owner, agent or lessee in a sanitary condition in conformance with the requirements of the utilities superintendent and the provisions herein, and screened from public view by an opaque fence with a minimum height of five (5) feet. 
(6)	Two (2) copies of a site plan are required for each property on which a bulk container is to be located. The site plan shall be drawn on a sheet not larger than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size. Site plans shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet. The site plan submitted for approval shall indicate the following: 
a.	Name, title, address and telephone number of applicant or owner. 
b.	Date, scale and north arrow. 
c.	Boundaries of the lot. 
d.	Location of the proposed bulk container on the property and its relation and dimensions to existing streets, drives, alleys, property lines and other structures. 
e.	All pertinent details on items a. through d. above. 
(7)	Each site plan shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. Following the approval of the city, the plans shall be stamped "approved" and signed by the utilities superintendent. One (1) copy of the approved site plan will be forwarded to owner; the other copy to be retained in the office of the city. The utilities superintendent may recommend to the governing body the revocation of any certificate for any violation of the provisions herein. A record of all certificate holders shall be maintained by the city administrator. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4(4)) 
Sec. 24-189. - Unauthorized use of solid waste containers. 
No person, other than the agents of the city charged with such duty, shall move, molest, burn or interfere with any solid waste containers or their contents or any solid waste material set out for collection by the collection personnel, unless authorized by the utilities superintendent. Any person conducting salvage operations by collecting material after such material has been placed for collection by the city must obtain a license for such operations from the city, and conduct such operations in accordance with the policies and instructions issued by the utilities superintendent. 
(Code 1977, § 14-10) 
Secs. 24-190—24-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 24-201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-202. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Palmetto, Georgia. 
Covered account means: 
(1)	An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)	Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, and litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, and continue credit, and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, a government or governmental subdivision or agency, a trust, an estate, a partnership, a cooperative, or an association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information, and drivers' license information, and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-203. - Findings. 
(a)	The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)	Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include electricity, water, sewer, and sanitation services. 
(c)	The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(d)	The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(e)	The city determines that there is a risk of identity theft occurring with respect to covered accounts maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-204. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)	As a precondition of opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)	Each account may be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-205. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)	Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)	Such password(s) shall be changed by the city administrator on a regular basis, shall be at least eight (8) characters in length, and shall contain letters, numbers, and symbols. 
(c)	Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city administrator and the password changed immediately. 
(d)	Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city administrator and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-206. - Credit card payments. 
(a)	In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)	All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer database. 
(c)	Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit car or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-207. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account, or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)	Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies, or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.	A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.	A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.	A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.	Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual patterns of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.	A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.	An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.	A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.	An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)	Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.	Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.	Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.	An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)	Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.	Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.	The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.	The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's death master file. 
b.	Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.	Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.	Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing addresses, mail drop addresses, or jail addresses or invalid phone numbers, pager numbers, or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.	The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.	The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.	The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.	Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is one file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.	The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)	Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.	Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.	A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.	An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.	Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; or 
2.	A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.	An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage, and other relevant factors. 
e.	Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.	The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.	The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.	The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement, or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identify theft. 
(5)	Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims, or other reliable sources regarding possible identify theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-208. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city administrator: 
(1)	Contact the customer; 
(2)	Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.	Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.	Close the account; 
(3)	Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)	Notify a debt collector within twenty-four (24) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)	Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city administrator: 
(1)	Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)	Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)	Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-209. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)	The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)	Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)	Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)	Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)	Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-210. - Program administration. 
The city administrator is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city administrator is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by the city regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city administrator, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)	The city administrator shall create, at least annually, a report on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.	The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.	Service provider arrangements; 
c.	Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.	Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)	The city administrator is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city administrator shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-211. - Outside providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the city administrator shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Sec. 24-212. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)	Policy. In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one (1) or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)	Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.	Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.	Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records, or tax records; or 
c.	Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)	Verify the information in the consumer report with the customer. 
(b)	Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)	In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
a.	The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
b.	The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
c.	The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)	Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(c)	Methods of confirming customer addresses. The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)	Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)	Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)	Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)	Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 1, 11-3-08) 
Chapter 25 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power to regulate and license businesses, § 27.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Business license taxes and fees, § 12-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1—25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Power to regulate taxicabs, § 28.1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
License shall mean a business license issued under chapter 12, article II. 
Taxicab shall mean a motor-driven vehicle of not more than eight-passenger capacity operated by the owner thereof or an agent, lessee or employee of the owner and which is regularly available for hire to transport persons within or outside the city. 
Taxicab business shall mean any separately owned and operated taxicab; or a fleet of owned or leased taxicabs; or a fleet of taxicabs owned separately but operating under one name. 
Sec. 25-27. - Inspection of cabs. 
The city police are authorized to make inspection of all taxicabs, from time to time, with full authority to approve or disapprove the operation thereof when the taxicab is not in good mechanical condition or is not in good sanitary condition. 
Sec. 25-28. - Schedule of fares to be posted. 
The schedule of fares shall be posted in each taxicab and in the office of each taxicab company. 
Secs. 25-29—25-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 25-41. - Required; application. 
(a)	Every person desiring to operate a taxicab business in the city shall make application for license or privilege to so operate to the city administrator or his designee on blanks furnished by the city. Such application shall contain the name and address of the owner, the make and vehicle serial number, model, year, total mileage and passenger-carrying capacity for each vehicle operated. Names of each operator are to be listed. 
(b)	The application shall be reviewed by the police department for any record of excessive recklessness on the part of the applicant or those operating taxicabs under the applicant's name. No person shall operate a taxicab in the city that has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony within the three (3) years immediately preceding the issuance of the license or been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to an offense involved in prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, or the illegal manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances in the three (3) years immediately preceding the issuance of the license. 
Sec. 25-42. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)	Every applicant for a taxicab business license shall, before the license is granted, deposit with the city administrator, for each taxicab for which the privilege to operate is sought, a policy or certificate of liability insurance, indemnifying the applicant in the sums required by law. The certificate or policy of liability insurance shall be issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in the state and, if obtainable, licensed to do business in the city. The certificate or policy of insurance shall identify by serial number all vehicles insured under the policy or policies. The license for the operation of the taxicab business shall expire upon the lapse or cancellation or termination or revocation of any policy covering any taxicab operated under the business. 
(b)	If any person owning, leasing or operating a taxicab in the city shall fail or refuse to satisfy and discharge any final judgment, within sixty (60) days after the date of the final judgment, such failure or refusal shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued to any person or business found liable under that final judgment. 
Sec. 25-43. - Issuance, display. 
If the application meets all requirements, a license shall be issued upon the payment of the proper license fee prescribed by the governing body. This license or a copy thereof shall be displayed on each taxicab operated in the city. 
Sec. 25-44. - License amendment. 
(a)	Each licensee under this division shall amend the license application originally filed for the license to include new taxicabs or exclude old taxicabs promptly upon adding or deleting taxicabs from the licensee's business so that an up-to-date list of operating taxicabs may be maintained. 
(b)	Each licensee hereunder shall also provide the city administrator proof that any new taxicab added to the application is fully insured as required under this division. 
Sec. 25-45. - Revocation. 
Any license under this division may be suspended or revoked by the municipal court upon a finding that any provision of this article has been violated or that the person or business holding the license or permit no longer meets the standards required for the issuance of the license or permit. 
Secs. 25-46—25-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NON-EMERGENCY TRANSPORTATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Non-emergency transportation business means any separately owned and operated non-emergency transportation vehicle; or a fleet of owned or leased non-emergency transportation vehicles; or a fleet of non-emergency transportation vehicles owned separately but operating under one name. 
Non-emergency transportation vehicle means any motor vehicle operated for hire, the destination of which is under the direction of the passenger transported therein, which is not a taxicab as defined under this chapter or a limousine as defined under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 25-72. - Inspection of vehicles. 
The city police are authorized to make inspection of all non-emergency transportation vehicles, from time to time, with full authority to approve or disapprove the operation thereof when the non-emergency transportation vehicle is not in good mechanical condition or is not in good sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 25-73. - Required; application. 
(a)	Every person desiring to operate a non-emergency transportation vehicle business in the city shall make application for license or privilege to so operate to the city administrator or his or her designee on blanks furnished by the city. Such application shall contain the name and address of the owner, the make and vehicle serial number, model, year, total mileage and passenger-carrying capacity for each vehicle operated. Names of each operator are to be listed. 
(b)	The application shall be reviewed by the police department for any record of excessive recklessness on the part of the applicant or those operating non-emergency transportation vehicles under the applicant's name. No person shall operate a non-emergency transportation vehicle in the city that has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony within the three (3) years immediately preceding the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 25-74. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)	Every applicant for a non-emergency transportation business license shall, before the license is granted, deposit with the city administrator, for each non-emergency transportation vehicle for which the privilege to operate is sought, a policy or certificate of liability insurance, indemnifying the applicant in the sums required by law. The certificate or policy of liability insurance shall be issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in the state and, if obtainable, licensed to do business in the city. The certificate or policy of insurance shall identify by serial number all vehicles insured under the policy or policies. The license for the operation of the non-emergency transportation vehicle business shall expire upon the lapse or cancellation or termination or revocation of any policy covering any non-emergency transportation vehicle operated under the business. 
(b)	If any person owning, leasing or operating a non-emergency transportation vehicle in the city shall fail or refuse to satisfy and discharge any final judgment, within sixty (60) days after the date of the final judgment, such failure or refusal shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued to any person or business found liable under that final judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 25-75. - Issuance; display. 
If the application meets all requirements, a license shall be issued upon the payment of the proper license fee prescribed by the governing body. This license or a copy thereof shall be displayed in each non-emergency transportation vehicle operated in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 25-76. - License amendment. 
(a)	Each licensee under this division shall amend the license application originally filed for the license to include new non-emergency transportation vehicles or exclude old non-emergency transportation vehicles promptly upon adding or deleting said vehicles to or from the licensee's business so that an up-to-date list of operating non-emergency transportation vehicles may be maintained. 
(b)	Each licensee hereunder shall also provide the city administrator proof that any new non-emergency transportation vehicle added to the application is fully insured as required under this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 25-77. - Revocation. 
Any license under this division may be suspended or revoked by the municipal court upon a finding that any provision of this article has been violated or that the person or business holding the license or permit no longer meets the standards required for the issuance of the license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 5-6-2013) 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 86-5  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PALMETTO, GEORGIA 
An ordinance of the City of Palmetto, Georgia, establishing rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land into streets, blocks and lots; requiring the preparation and presentation of Subdivision Plans and Plats; establishing minimum subdivision design standards; requiring street improvements and the installation of utilities as a condition of plat approval; defining terms; establishing procedures; providing penalties for violation; repealing conflicting ordinances; and for the related purposes. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-06, adopted Oct. 1, 2001, repealed appendix A, parts I—V, in its entirety and replaced it with a new appendix A, parts I—V. Former appendix A pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 86-5, adopted Oct. 6, 1986. Ord. No. 01-06 contained duplicate article IX, and the provisions of duplicate article IX through article XVIII have been redesignated as articles X—XIX at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; planning and development, ch. 19; soil erosion, sedimentation control and stormwater management, ch. 21; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority to plan, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

PART I. - BASIC PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Constitution of the State of Georgia and laws enacted pursuant thereto, and more specifically the Georgia General Planning Enabling Act of 1957 (Act No. 358, as amended), the mayor and council of the city, do hereby resolve and enact into law the following articles and sections, for the following purposes: 
(1)	To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the comprehensive plan and other policies and objectives of the city; 
(2)	To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, fire protection and other facilities and services in new land developments; 
(3)	To provide a system for the subdividing of lands and the accurate recording of land titles. 
(4)	To assure equitable review and approval of all land subdivisions by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider. 
(5)	To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new developments; 
(6)	To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and public facility sites in new subdivisions through the dedication or reservation of land for recreation, education and other public purposes; and 
(7)	To assure, in general, the wise development of new areas in harmony with the development plans of the city. 
(8)	To protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Palmetto, Georgia." 
ARTICLE III. - INTENT AND APPLICATION 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that this ordinance will apply to and provide guidance for the subdivision of lands within the incorporated limits of the city. Any land subdivision development activity must first comply with this ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEFINITIONS 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 

Sec. A. - Use of words and interpretation. 
(1)	Words in the present tense include the future tense. Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular. 
(2)	The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. 
(3)	The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)	The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations, associations, governmental bodies and all other legal entities. 
(5)	The word "street" includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, lanes, alleys and other vehicular ways. 
(6)	Use of the word "and" is inclusive and requires that all of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. 
(7)	Use of the word "or" is not exclusive and requires that at least one (1) of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. The word "or" may allow more than one (1) component phrase to be present or fulfilled, as in the term "and/or." 
Sec. B. - Specific definitions. 
(1)	Alley or service drive. A minor, permanent, public service way which is used primarily for vehicular service to the back or the side for properties otherwise abutting a street. 
(2)	Arterial. An arterial street as defined and/or designed in the Zoning Ordinance or comprehensive plan of the city. 
(3)	City. The City of Palmetto, Georgia. 
(4)	City engineer. The term "city engineer" as used herein includes the office of the city engineer, and as such, may include the building inspector, city clerk, city administrator, or other persons designated by the mayor and council to act on behalf of the city. 
(5)	Cul-de-sac. A minor local street having one (1) end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(6)	Electrical distribution, overhead. All electrical conductors and devices attached above ground to poles or other structures of sufficient size and strength. 
(7)	Electrical distribution, underground. All electrical conductors and devices with the exception of transformers, switching cubicles and meters installed underground. 
(8)	Electrical system, primary. That portion of the electrical distribution system operating at 7200/12,470 volts. The primary electrical distribution system includes the transformers necessary to supply the secondary electrical system. 
(9)	Electrical system, secondary. That portion of the electrical distribution system operating at the customer utilization voltage. 
(10)	Final plat. A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and boundary information and certifications required by these regulations and conforming to the state Plat Act. 
(11)	Lot. A developed or undeveloped tract of land in one (1) ownership, legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
(12)	Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon the intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
(13)	Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat for which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fulton/Coweta County, or a parcel of land, the deed for which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fulton/Coweta County. 
(14)	Lot, through or double-frontage . A lot having frontage on two (2) streets that are approximately parallel. 
(15)	Pedestrian way. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded. 
(16)	Planning and zoning board. The city planning and zoning board. 
(17)	Plat. A map or drawing indicating the subdivision, resubdivision, or recombination of land. 
(18)	Preliminary plat. A drawing which shows the perimeter boundary, topography, lot layout arrangement, street layout, and other features of a proposed subdivision, as specified in these regulations. 
(19)	Street, private. An access way, other than a driveway, similar to and having the same function as a public street, providing access to more than one (1) property, but held in private ownership. 
(20)	Street, public . Any publicly maintained way for vehicular traffic which has been accepted for maintenance as a street by the city. For the purposes of this ordinance, streets are divided into the following categories: 
(a)	Major thoroughfare : A principal arterial highway carrying through traffic, designated as such on the zoning map of the city. 
(b)	Collector street : A street that carried traffic from local streets to major thoroughfares, including such streets in new subdivisions as required by the planning and zoning board. 
(c)	Local street : A street used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(d)	Marginal access street : A local street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare, expressway, limited access highway or railroad right-of-way, which provides access to abutting properties. 
(21)	Subdivider . The person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under these regulations, or the authorized agent of that person for the purpose of such proceeding. 
(22)	Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of legacy or building development; including all divisions of land involving a new street to which the public has access, or a change in an existing street, and including resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
ARTICLE V. - PLATTING AUTHORITY AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. A. - Platting authority. 
From and after the passage of this ordinance, the mayor and council shall be the platting authority. No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened or accepted as a public street or for any other purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, nor subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the mayor and council. Said final approval shall be entered in writing on the final plat by the city clerk. A recorded final plat shall be presented to the city clerk prior to any building permits being issued for the subdivision. 
Sec. B. - Plat approval required prior to initiation of construction. 
No construction work nor associated clearing work shall be undertaken on a proposed land subdivision within the incorporated area of the city except as permitted by these subdivision regulations. 
Sec. C. - Land subdivision plat recording. 
No plat of a land subdivision within the incorporated area of the city may be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fulton/Coweta County except the land subdivision plat of record on which is inscribed the approval of the planning and zoning board and the mayor and council. 
The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision which is not a land subdivision plat of record approved by the mayor and council is hereby declared a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, the person(s) filing or recording such plat shall be punished as provided by law. 
Sec. D. - Use of plat. 
No person shall transfer title or attempt to record title to any land in the city, and no building permit may be issued on said land unless: 
(1)	Said land existed as a single parcel, recorded as such with the clerk of superior court of Fulton County or Coweta County, as determined by the location of the land, prior to the 1966 subdivision regulations of the city; 
(2)	Said land is shown on a final plat as approved (under these or any previous applicable regulations) and duly recorded with the clerk of superior court of Fulton County or Coweta County, as determined by the location of the land; 
(3)	Said land is shown on a plat recorded with the clerk of superior court of Fulton County or Coweta County, as determined by the location of the land, pursuant to the regulations governing subdivision exemptions contained herein; or 
(4)	Said land is an aggregation of properties for land assembly purposes, and no building permit will be requested prior to the compliance with these regulations and the zoning ordinance. 
The owner or the agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided in the incorporated area of the city who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell land by reference to or exhibition or other use of a plat of a subdivision that is not the land subdivision plat of record that has been approved by the mayor and council and has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fulton/Coweta County shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city attorney of the city may cause such transfer or agreement to be enjoined by appropriate action. 
Sec. E. - Acceptance of and improvements in unapproved streets. 
The mayor and council shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street, or authorize the laying of any water mains, sewers, connections or other facilities or utilities in any street within the incorporated area of the city unless such street is shown on a land subdivision plat of record approved by the mayor and council and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fulton/Coweta County, or unless the street had attained the legal status of a public street prior to the effective date of this or a prior subdivision ordinance; provided, however, that the mayor and council may locate, construct or accept any street if the resolution for such street is first submitted to the planning and zoning board for its review and comment. 
Sec. F. - Erection of buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued for, and no building or other structure shall be erected on, any lot within the incorporated area of the city unless permitted by these regulations; unless the street on which the lot fronts corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on the subdivision plat of record of a subdivision that has been approved by the mayor and council and has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fulton/Coweta County or unless the specific building lot existed and the street had attained the legal status of a public street prior to the effective date of this or a prior subdivision ordinance or had been accepted as a public street by the mayor and council. 
Sec. G. - Effect of plat approval on dedications. 
The tentative approval of preliminary plat by the planning and zoning board or the approval of a final plat by the mayor and council does not affect the status of dedication of any streets or other areas shown on the plat reserved for public use. 
Sec. H. - Subdivision exemptions. 
For the purpose of these regulations, the types of activities contained in this section shall be considered subdivisions but exempt from the procedures and required public improvements portions of these regulations, except as noted: 
(1)	Combinations. The combination or recombination of two (2) or more previously platted lots of record, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots or parcels are in compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
(2)	Minor subdivisions. The division of land into two (2) lots, provided: 
(a)	Each lot complies with all requirements of the ordinance and is limited to single-family detached residential use. 
(b)	Each proposed lot fronts on an existing public street having a right-of-way not less than the city minimum for the street category given to the existing public street. 
(c)	Each proposed lot complies with requirements of the Fulton/Coweta County health department. 
(d)	Each lot thus created may not be resubdivided pursuant to the provisions of this subparagraph. Such resubdivisions shall be accomplished only through the subdivision procedures contained in these regulations. 
(3)	Estate subdivisions. The division of land in any single-family detached residential zoning district into lots having a minimum lot area of five (5) acres, provided: 
(a)	Each proposed lot fronts on an existing public street having a right-of-way not less than the city minimum for the street category given to the existing public street. 
(b)	Each proposed lot shall provide at least one hundred (100) feet of frontage upon the existing public street and shall meet or exceed all other minimum requirements of the applicable single-family detached residential zoning district. 
(c)	Each proposed lot complies with requirements of the Fulton/Coweta health department. 
(d)	No lot thus created may be rescheduled to less than five (5) acres as an exemption to these regulations. 
For the purpose of these regulations, the types of activities contained in this section shall be considered subdivisions but exempt from the procedures and required public improvements portions of these regulations, provided the property owner notifies the city in writing of such division and provides a copy of a plat of the land subdivision prepared and sealed by a land surveyor currently registered in Georgia. Such notification shall be submitted to the city clerk. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE 
Before proceeding with a proposed land subdivision, subdividers are invited and encouraged to consult early and informally with the city engineer. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout of the subdivision. No fee shall be charged for this review, and no formal application is necessary. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to afford the subdivider an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the city engineer in order to facilitate the subsequent preparation and approval of subdivision plans. 
PART II. - THE PRELIMINARY PLAT 
ARTICLE VII. - PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS 
The preliminary plat for a subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. The sheet size shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches by thirty-six (36) inches, provided, however, a scale of two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of forty-eight (48) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The minimum sheet size shall be eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches. The city engineer may approve other scales and sheet sizes as deemed appropriate. 

Sec. A. - The preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall consist of a scale map or maps depicting the following: 
(1)	Streets, street names, and right-of-way widths. 
(2)	Other rights-of-way and easements. 
(3)	Lot lines drawn to scale. 
(4)	Lot and block identification. 
(5)	Minimum building setback lines. 
(6)	Subdivision boundary lines and total subdivision land area in acres. 
(7)	Key plan (if more than one (1) sheet), legend, and notes. 
(8)	Dimensions, data and lines as necessary to clearly indicate that all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance are met. Where appropriate, such information may be shown on the preliminary site plan. 
(9)	Title, scale, north arrow, and date. 
(10)	Name, address and telephone number of owner of record and of subdivider. 
(11)	Proposed name of subdivision and its acreage. 
(12)	The location of the subdivision and developments in its vicinity including land lot and district numbers and lines, and city and county names and limit lines. 
(13)	Name of owners of record of adjoining land. 
(14)	Location of existing structures on the tract. 
(15)	Natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, creeks, state waters, wetlands, 100-year flood plains, and other significant features. The source of flood plain information shall be shown. 
(16)	Location of all known existing or previous landfills. 
(17)	Topography with mean sea level contours at intervals no greater than five (5) feet. The source of topographic information shall be shown. 
(18)	Pavement widths. 
(19)	Proposed public or semi-public sites for parks, churches and other community facilities, if any. 
(20)	Generalized storm drainage plan including catchbasin locations, tentative sewer and culvert sizes, spot elevations of key system elements, final disposition of surface water. 
(21)	Sequence and geographic limits of construction phases proposed for large scale development. 
(22)	A written summary of the proposed subdivision giving information as to the overall development plan including, as appropriate, the types and size of structures, number of housing units, types of land uses, anticipated traffic generation, and other pertinent information so that the affects of the subdivision can be considered by the planning and zoning board. 
(23)	Description of the anticipated utility systems required to serve the proposed subdivision including projected average and peak demands or flows for potable water, and fire protection. 
(24)	Description of proposed stormwater management practices for the subdivision including the ownership and proper maintenance provisions of all stormwater detention facilities within the subdivision. 
(25)	Such additional information as may be reasonably required to obtain an adequate understanding of the subdivision. 
Sec. B. - Electrical distribution. 
The city owns and operates its own electrical distribution system. The preliminary plat shall be supplemented by having the electrical load requirements to each lot, building, or facility to be served shown thereon. Any loads requiring other than 120/240 volt singlephase service shall be specified in detail. 
Underground electrical distribution is the normal and preferred method of construction. 
The subdivider shall be responsible for payment of an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the cost of underground construction to the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 7-9-07) 
Sec. C. - Wastewater disposal. 
Unless the subdivision will be served by any public sewer system, the preliminary plat shall be supplemented by an engineering report setting forth in detail how disposal of wastewater will be accomplished. The engineering report shall be acceptable to all county and state agencies having jurisdiction with respect to wastewater disposal matters. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES 

Sec. A. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
Submission of a preliminary plat to the planning and zoning board by a subdivider shall occur when the following have been received at the office of the city clerk or city administrator. 
(1)	Preliminary plat filing fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(2)	Eight (8) copies of the preliminary plat. 
Sec. B. - Review procedures for preliminary plat. 
The following procedures shall be followed in reviewing the preliminary plat: 
(1)	The planning and zoning board by way of the city clerk or city administrator shall distribute at least one (1) copy of the proposed preliminary plat to the city engineer who shall thereupon analyze and acquaint himself with the preliminary plat and forward comments to the planning and zoning board. In order to have review action completed for the next planning and zoning board meeting, the preliminary plat must be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the meeting. 
(2)	After review of the comments by the city engineer, the city clerk or city administrator shall notify the subdivider of the time and place at which the planning and zoning board will act upon the preliminary plat. The city clerk or city administrator shall advise the subdivider in such notification if an unfavorable recommendation is to be made to the planning and zoning board and offer the subdivider the opportunity of making written withdrawal of his application and arranging for an early conference to discuss the reason for an unfavorable recommendation. If the subdivider elects to withdraw his application, he shall not be refunded the preliminary plat filing fee nor shall he be required to pay an additional filing fee in the event he resubmits his application within one (1) year after the initial submittal. 
(3)	The planning and zoning board shall be furnished recommendations of the city engineer, after which the planning and zoning board shall tentatively approve or disapprove the preliminary subdivision. The ground for disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the planning and zoning board. 
Sec. C. - No construction work nor site clearance authorized. 
No construction work nor site clearance shall be deemed to have been authorized on a proposed land subdivision as a result of any action taken by the planning and zoning board in connection with approving or disapproving a preliminary plat. 
Sec. D. - Expiration of preliminary plat approval. 
Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire and be null and void after a period of one (1) year unless an extension of time is approved by the planning and zoning board. 
Sec. E. - Required certifications on the preliminary plat. 
Preliminary engineering certificate I hereby certify that this proposed Preliminary Plat correctly represents data compiled or verified through a survey completed by me on ____________ , 20 ____________ of property shown and described thereon. 
By: ____________  Registered Georgia Land Surveyor 
No. ____________ Date ____________ 
Certificate of design I hereby certify that the design and layout of the proposed drainage system, lots, block, streets, and other paved features included in this proposed Preliminary Plat have been prepared by me or under my direct supervision. 
By: ____________  Registered Landscape Architect No. _____ 
or ____________  Registered Land Surveyor No. _____ 
or ____________  Registered Civil Engineer No. _____ 
Certificate of preliminary plat approval All requirements of the city subdivision standards relative to the preparation and submission of a Preliminary Plat having been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted, subject to further provisions of said Subdivision Standards. 

This Certificate Expires: ____________ (Date) 
PART III. - THE FINAL PLAT 
ARTICLE IX. - FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS 
Sub-Article 1. - Map Requirements 

Sec. A. - Specifications. 
The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale of the final plat shall be one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch or larger. 
Sheet size shall be twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. If the complete plan cannot be shown on one (1) sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
The final plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the property contained within the final plat, and tied to a point of reference with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than one (1) in ten thousand (10,000) and shall meet all requirements of state law regarding the recording of maps and plats. The final plat shall substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat and it may constitute only a portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record at any one (1) time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of the these regulations, and said portion is not consistent with the public health, safety, or welfare. Any substantial deviation from the approved preliminary plat shall require revision and reapproval of the preliminary plat. 
Sec. B. - Information on existing conditions to be on final plat. 
The final plat shall contain the following information on existing conditions: 
(1)	Name, address, and telephone number of owner of record and of subdivider. 
(2)	Proposed name of subdivision and unit or phase number, if any, and its acreage. 
(3)	Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances based on field survey at an accuracy of at least 1:10,000. 
(4)	The location of the subdivision and developments in its vicinity including land lot and district numbers and lines. The location sketch scale shall be not greater than 2,000 feet to one (1) inch. 
(5)	Names of owners of record of adjoining land. 
(6)	Names, location, and right-of-way width of streets on and adjacent to the tract. 
(7)	Easements on and adjacent to the tract with their locations, width and purpose. 
(8)	Location of significant existing structures on the tract. 
(9)	Location of significant watercourses on and adjacent to the property. 
(10)	Location of any flood plains on the site. 
(11)	Boundary lines of the subdivision property perimeter showing bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds and distances in feet and hundredths of a foot along all lines and the bearings and distances to an existing street intersection or other recognized permanent landmark. The boundary information shall be tied and related to the State Plane Coordinates System, 1983 North American Datum, Georgia, West zone. 
(12)	Municipal or county jurisdictional lines tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or adjoin the subdivision; land lot or land district lines traversing or adjoining the subdivision shall also be indicated. 
Sec. C. - Physical layout features to be shown on final plat. 
The following physical layout features shall be shown on the final plat: 
(1)	Streets and alleys with proposed street names, right-of-way widths, required for present or future widening of streets shown on the major thoroughfare plan. 
(2)	Lot lines with complete dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second, and radii, arc and chord length, and chord bearings of round corners, lot numbers and block numbers or letters. 
(3)	Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data including radii, chord lengths and bearings, lengths of arcs and tangents, and points of curvature and tangency. 
(4)	Location of any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use with notes stating their purpose and limitations. Location of any areas to be reserved by private deed covenant for common use of all property owners, or dedicated to a homeowner's association. 
(5)	Sites, if any, to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
(6)	Building setback lines with dimensions. When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than ninety (90) degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown. 
(7)	Location of any required easements, together with purpose. 
(8)	Location, material, and size of all drainage pipes, location and type of all drainage system appurtenances such as catch basins, headwalls, and inlets, location and extent of detention ponds with 100-year event level noted, the location, material, and size of all city water mains, the location of all fire hydrants, and the location, width, and purpose of any easements, including slope easements. 
(9)	A statement of private covenants, if any, and if they are brief enough to be put directly on the final plat; otherwise, if covenants are separately recorded, a statement as follows: 
"This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated ____________ , which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were recorded at Deed Book ____________ , page ____________ ." 
(10)	Extent of the 100-year flood plain within the subdivision. When flood plain is present, a chart giving the areas within and outside the flood plain for each lot containing any portion of the flood plain shall be on the final plat. The origin of the flood plain data shall be indicated. 
Sec. D. - Restrictions on subdivision names. 
The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the Palmetto area. 
Sec. E. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
The proposed land development shall comply with all requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Sub-Article 2. - General Design Requirements 

Sec. A. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, and any land deemed to be unsuitable for development due to steep slopes, unsuitable soils, subsurface conditions or other undesirable properties shall not be subjected to development for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life, or property, unless steps are taken to eliminate or abate these conditions. Land within a proposed subdivision which is unsuitable for development shall be incorporated into the buildable lots as excess lot area. 
Sec. B. - Preservation of trees and other natural growth. 
The subdivider shall preserve all trees and other natural growth to the maximum extent feasible. 
Sec. C. - Access. 
When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such lots shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. Every development shall be designed to facilitate access to adjoining properties which are developed or anticipated to be developed in a manner substantially similar to the subject property. Locations of interparcel access shall be as required by and subject to the approval of the city. 
Any lot required to provide minimum frontage by the zoning district in which the lot is located shall provide vehicular access directly from a public street along the frontage or along any other property line which abuts a public street. Private streets as may be approved under the provisions of the zoning ordinance or development regulations shall be constructed to the roadway standards of the city. 
Sec. D. - Conformance to zoning ordinance, street, and comprehensive plans. 
All streets and other features of the zoning ordinance of the city shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated and required by the zoning ordinance and zoning map. 
When features of the comprehensive plan of the city (such as schools or other public building sites, parks, or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision or when these features have not been anticipated by the comprehensive plan but are considered essential by the planning and zoning board and/or the mayor and council, such features shall be either dedicated within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
Whenever a final plat proposes the dedication to public use of land that the mayor and council finds not required or not suitable for such public use, the mayor and council shall refuse to approve the plat and shall notify the land developer of the reasons for such action. 
ARTICLE X. - LOT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. A. - Block lengths and widths. 
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to: 
(1)	Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)	Applicable zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
(3)	Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(4)	Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
The planning and zoning board may, when existing or proposed pedestrian/bicycle circulation patterns or public gathering places so justify, require pedestrian/bicycle ways or access easements through blocks. 
Sec. B. - Lot sizes. 
Lots should be designed generally such that they are no more than four (4) times as deep as they are wide at the building setback line. For lots which include: 
(1)	Particular or unusual difficulties to meet minimum setback limits; 
(2)	Unusual building sites due to easement configuration; 
(3)	Possible flood plain encroachment; 
(4)	Stormwater detention facilities; 
(5)	Zoning-imposed buffers; and/or 
(6)	Unusual or severe topographic features, the city may require a final plat notation requiring an approved site plan prior to issuance of a building permit. 
All lots shall conform to the requirements of the city's zoning ordinance. Corner lots shall have extra width to permit prescribed setback limits from all streets on which the lot has frontage. 
Sec. C. - Lot lines. 
Side lot lines should generally be at right angles or radial to street rights-of-way. In cul-de-sacs, side lot lines should be radial to the center point of the cul-de-sac. When a more efficient use of the land relative to topographic conditions or improved building sites can be achieved by a reasonable lot pattern which does not fully adhere to the desirable side lot line configuration defined in this paragraph, the planning and zoning board will allow the alternate lot pattern unless specific objections are noted. 
Sec. D. - Front-yard setback lines. 
A line meeting the front-yard setback requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be established on all lots. 
Sec. E. - Through or double-frontage lots. 
Through or double-frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography. 
A buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide, planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall and provide an effective visual screen, with no right of access, shall be required along the portion of a lot abutting such traffic artery or other incompatible use. 
Sec. F. - Block and lot easements. 
Easements having a minimum width of ten (10) feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as required, for utilities. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, natural channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially to the limits of such watercourse plus additional width as necessary to accommodate future construction, as required by the planning and zoning board, but not to exceed the one-hundred-year intermediate regional floodplain, plus five (5) feet horizontally. Parallel streets may be required by the planning and zoning board in connection with the above easements. 
ARTICLE XI. - FINAL ENGINEERING PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
Sub-Article 1. - General Requirements 

Sec. A. - No street and/or utility construction work nor site clearance until preliminary plat has been approved by the planning and zoning board. 
No street and/or utility construction work nor site clearance shall be undertaken on the property involved until the preliminary plat has been approved by the planning and zoning board and the subdivider has been so notified and the city engineer has reviewed and approved final engineering plans. All work undertaken thereafter shall be in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and final engineering plans. 
Sec. B. - Required improvements. 
Prior to the commencement of construction of any building within a subdivision, the following street and utility improvements must be complete or otherwise permitted under article XII, section G. 
(1)	Storm drainage system including satisfactory storm water discharge on or off the subdivision site. 
(2)	Street grading. 
(3)	Satisfactory erosion control. 
(4)	All-weather surfacing of roads. 
(5)	Bridges necessary to public access along any street proposed for public dedication. 
(6)	Sanitary sewer system including satisfactory on or off-site disposal of wastewater. 
(7)	Water distribution system with approved fire hydrants and any off-site extension of the city water supply to the subdivision. 
Sec. C. - Street and utility ownership. 
Except where clearly indicated to the contrary on the approved final plat, streets, storm drainage, sanitary sewerage, electrical distribution system, and water system improvements shall, on satisfactory completion, be owned by the city. Privately-owned water and sewer utilities, where permitted by the city within shopping centers, apartment developments and similar developments, shall conform with these subdivision regulations up to the point at which city-enforced building utility code(s) assume jurisdiction. 
Sec. D. - Qualified engineers. 
Final engineering plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer regularly engaged in the design of such facilities. 
Sec. E. - Plan presentation. 
Overall street and utility plans shall be drawn at a scale of twenty (20), fifty (50), or one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch with a contour interval of not greater than five (5) feet. Required plan and profiles shall be drawn at a horizontal scale of twenty (20) feet or fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch, and vertical scale of ten (10) feet to one (1) inch. 
Sheet size shall be at least twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, and where more than one (1) sheet is used, an appropriate index map shall be included on a separate sheet of the same size. Each sheet shall contain numeric scale and date, and north arrow where appropriate. 
All plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn using generally accepted drafting techniques and conventions. 
Where appropriate, written specifications on eight and one-half by eleven-inch paper shall accompany the plans to describe proposed improvements in more detail. 
Sec. F. - General information to be shown on engineering plans. 
(1)	Name, address, and telephone number of owner of record and of subdivider. 
(2)	Name of engineer responsible for preparation of plans. 
(3)	Exact boundary lines of the subdivision by bearings and distances, and any proposed limits of construction. 
(4)	Names of streets. 
(5)	The location of the subdivision and developments in its vicinity including: 
(a)	Land lot and district numbers and lines. 
(b)	City and county names and limit lines. 
(c)	Names of owners of record of adjoining land. 
(d)	Location, width and purpose of any existing easements. 
(6)	Location of existing buildings and other structures on the tract and any significant natural features, including trees that should be preserved. 
(7)	Scale layout of lots and blocks with letter or number designations. 
(8)	Detailed material and equipment specifications and constructions procedures to be employed. Where city standards are proposed, such standards may be incorporated by reference. 
Sec. G. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval unless a performance bond is posted. The cost of sidewalk installation may be set aside in escrow where proposed road improvements may impact the location of the sidewalk. 
(1)	Sidewalks required on residential building lots shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each individual dwelling. 
(2)	Sidewalks required on common or recreation areas shall be installed prior to final plat approval. 
(3)	Sidewalks required on other projects shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion, as appropriate. 
Sub-Article 2. - Final Street, Grading and Drainage Plan Requirements 

Sec. A. - General information to be shown on plans. 
(1)	Route number of any state highway to which a connection is to be made. 
(2)	Existing and proposed streets within a subdivision or in its immediate vicinity including: 
(a)	Location. 
(b)	Name. 
(c)	Location of pavement edge, together with any existing or required surface water drainage pipes or other appurtenances. 
(d)	Right-of-way with its location measured to the pavement edge of the right-of-way. 
(e)	Centerline, with the distance from pavement edge to the centerline. 
(f)	Radius of all returns. 
(g)	Stations at every one hundred (100) feet on the street centerlines. Also, stations at points of curvature and tangency, and at the beginning and end of all returns, at centerline intersections and at subdivision or construction limits. 
(3)	Road center line curve data including deflection angle, radius, degree of curvature and tangent distance. 
(a)	At cul-de-sacs, show grade profiles and elevations around the entire turn-around. 
(4)	The profile of proposed street construction must include: 
(a)	Percent of grade. 
(b)	Elevations at beginning and end of all vertical curves. 
(c)	Length of vertical curves with elevations and stations or vertical points of intersection. 
(d)	Elevations computed every fifty (50) feet along tangent sections and every twenty-five (25) feet within a vertical curve. 
(e)	Elevations of all intersections of streets, at all street intersections with boundaries of the subdivision, at all culverts, at all storm water crossings and at all catch basin inlets. 
(5)	Existing roads to remain in use which abut or traverse the subdivision shall be shown, including the following: 
(a)	Profiles. 
(b)	Cross sections at fifty-foot intervals. 
(c)	Any surface water drainage pipes and related appurtenances. 
(6)	When a cul-de-sac turnaround is used at the temporary end of a street, the proposed grade and existing profiles shall be carried beyond the property line a sufficient distance to show the feasibility of future extension of the proposed street. 
(7)	When a proposed street intersects, extends or joins an existing street, both edges of the pavement surface on the existing street shall be shown in plan and profile for a sufficient distance to show that a smooth transition with exist. 
(8)	Where a proposed street is located near an existing stream or drainageway, show the profiles of the top of the bank, computed water elevations and the flow line of the stream or open drainageway. Show the relation of the proposed street grade to the profiles of the stream or drainageway. 
(9)	Easements for pedestrian access across blocks. 
(10)	Traffic barricades or "No Through Street" signs. Relating primarily to grading and drainage: 
(11)	Give the watershed area in acres at all culvert pipes, catch basins and other entrances, if any. 
(12)	Show the existing location or relocation of all streams that are not to be piped and all existing surface drainage structures with profiles as follows: 
(a)	Profile of top of bank (on both sides of stream where a difference in elevation exists). 
(b)	Profile of flow line of stream bed. 
(c)	A detailed typical section and type of stabilization to be provided. 
(d)	A flood plain study will be required of all land areas proposed for development which might be subject to flooding. 
(13)	The direction of drainage flow in streams, storm sewers, gutters, sub drains and the like. 
(14)	The location of all springs either within the right-of-way or draining to the right-of-way. 
(15)	The location of storm sewers and appurtenances, including: 
(a)	Stations at every one hundred (100) feet and at appurtenances. 
(b)	Catch basins with proposed elevations for the tops and inverts. 
(c)	All stream crossings. 
(d)	Outfalls of storm sewers to existing streams. 
(16)	Storm sewer profiles as follows: 
(a)	Profile of existing ground at centerline of proposed storm sewer. 
(b)	Profile of proposed finished grade. 
(c)	Percent of grade of proposed storm sewer. 
(17)	All existing or proposed drainage easement. 
(18)	The size and type of class of drainage pipe to be installed both within and outside the road right-of-way. 
(19)	Proposed drainage ditches for the full length in all easements. Show centerline profiles, a detailed typical section and the type of stabilization to be provided when velocity exceeds three (3) feet per second. 
(20)	The location of all sanitary sewers, if any, and appurtenances, as required to demonstrate freedom of conflict between sanitary and storm sewers. 
(21)	Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. Develop a plan in accordance with city ordinance. In the absence of such ordinance, in accordance with state standards and requirements and with approval of city engineer. 
Sec. B. - Right-of-way and pavement widths. 
Minimum widths for construction (new streets or widening sections) shall be as follows: 

 
* Roadway width dimensions are back of curb to back of curb. 
Sec. C. - Design standards for streets. 
All streets shall conform to the city design and construction standards. In the absence of such standards, the following requirements shall apply as well as good current practices as approved by the city. 
(1)	Access: A maximum number of two hundred (200) residential units shall be allowed per street outlet to a public street. Reserve strips controlling access to public streets shall not be permitted. 
(2)	Street jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(3)	Street gradients. Roads and streets within subdivisions shall be designed to avoid crossing steep slopes where significant cut and fill could be required, wherever feasible. In all other cases the following apply: 
(a)	The minimum street gradient shall be one (1) percent without special approval from the city engineer. A minimum street gradient of one-half (½) percent to one (1) percent may be approved by the city engineer, based on adequate engineering designs provided by the subdivider's engineer, where at least one (1) percent cannot reasonably be achieved due to topographical limitations imposed by the land. 
(b)	The maximum street gradient for primary arterial streets shall be eight (8) percent. The maximum street gradient for secondary arterial, primary and secondary collector and nonresidential local streets shall be ten (10) percent. The maximum street gradient for residential local streets shall be fourteen (14) percent. Grades between twelve (12) percent and fourteen (14) percent shall not exceed a length of one hundred fifty (150) feet measured as the tangent length between points of vertical curvature. 
(c)	The maximum gradient on any cul-de-sac shall be eight (8) percent. 
(4)	Vertical street alignment: 
(a)	All changes in street profile grades having an algebraic difference greater than one (1) percent shall be connected by a parabolic curve having a minimum length (L) equal to the product of the algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) and the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its category (i.e., L=A*K). 
(b)	Constant (K) values are shown in the following table B(4)(a) for both desirable and minimum acceptable conditions. In all cases, the desirable value shall be used, unless it cannot be achieved due to topographical conditions beyond the subdivider's control. In such conditions, the city engineer may approve a lesser value to the extent required by the unique situation, but in no event less than the minimum value shown in table C(4)(a). 
Table C(4)(a) 

 
(5)	Horizontal street alignment: 
(a)	All new streets shall conform with the horizontal centerline curvature and superelevation criteria shown in the following Table C(5)(a). 
Table C(5)(a) 

 
(b)	Superelevation runoff shall be provided on each end of horizontal curves to rotate pavement section from normal crown section to full superelevation section and to rotate pavement section from full superelevation section to normal crown section in accordance with design standards of the state department of transportation. 
(c)	Tangents between reverse horizontal curves shall not be less than those shown in the following Table C(5)(c). 
Table C(5)(c) 

 
(6)	Street intersections: 
(a)	Intersecting streets shall meet approximately at right angles and shall not be at an angle of less than eighty (80) degrees unless approved by the city engineer. 
(b)	For all but local streets, street intersections, including approaches, shall have a maximum vertical grade of two (2) percent. For local streets, street intersections, including approaches, shall have a maximum vertical grade of five (5) percent. The minimum approach length (distance from extended outer edge of the nearest through lane of the intersecting street to the point of vertical curvature in the approaching street) shall be provided in accordance with the following table C(6)(b). 
Table C(6)(b) 

 
* For intersections of local residential streets, the minimum approach length is zero unless the approaching street grade is five (5) percent or more, in which case the indicated minimums apply. 
(c)	Intersection radii for streets, measured at the back of the curb, and for rights-of-way shall be as shown in the following table C(6)(c). For intersecting streets of different classifications, the larger radii shall be provided. In all cases, sufficient right-of-way shall be provided to maintain at least ten (10) feet from the back of curb. For intersecting rights-of-way, lines may be joined by either an arc having the minimum radius shown in table C(6)(c) or by a chord connecting the end points of an arc having the minimum radius shown in Table C(6) (c). Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at angles less than ninety (90) degrees. 
Table C(6)(c) 

 
(7)	Islands: In general, use of raised traffic islands is discouraged in favor of painted islands supplemented with traffic buttons or other devices manufactured for traffic control. Where requested by the city engineer, traffic islands shall conform to the design guidance of the latest edition of "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," published by the American Association of Highway and Transportation Officials. Improvements on islands within rights-of-way shall be limited to traffic control devices. 
(8)	Turning lanes: Turning lanes shall be required by the city to meet projected traffic demand and/or safe operations. When provided, turning lanes shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)	Provide no less than one hundred fifty (150) feet of storage length for arterial roadways. Provide not less than one hundred (100) feet of storage length for collector roadways. 
(b)	Provide taper lengths of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
(c)	Longer storage and taper lengths may be required when traffic projections indicated they are justified. 
(9)	Cul-de-sac streets: Existing and future street connections are encouraged to eliminate the number of new culs-de-sac to be maintained by the city and to facilitate access to and from homes in different parts of the tract and adjoining parcels. Culs-de-sac are appropriate when they support greater open space conservation or provide extensive pedestrian linkages. Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed so that the maximum desirable length is eight hundred (800) feet, but no longer than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet, including circular turn around. Where feasible, cul-de-sacs shall incorporate a pervious or bioretention landscaped area in the center. 
(10)	Street length: Minimize subdivision roadway length by using a roadway layout with the least pavement length suitable for the site's topography and other planning goals. 
(11)	Circulation and access: 
(a)	Circulation and access provisions shall be appropriate to the scale of the project and to anticipated traffic characteristics, and consistent with the requirements of the city road standards. Deviations from these standards may be granted where a bioretention swale with compost mended soils shall be provided within the right-of-way or easement dedicated to the City of Palmetto adjacent to the public right-of-way or in islands created by loop roadways. 
(b)	The use of common driveway access may be provided and is encouraged. Shared and common driveways provide the required traveled path to or through a parking lot for multiple single-family dwellings, multifamily structures, and commercial developments. These "driveways" provide vehicular access for a single family, multifamily and commercial developments. All areas identified within developments that are intended for shared, routine use and/or passage during all hours by all residents and their guests shall be noted on the face of the preliminary and final plats and/or site plans. Shared driveways and common drives shall be designed to meet the below criteria: 
1.	The use of low impact development (LID) best management practices (BMPs) in shared and common driveway construction shall be required whenever site and soil conditions make LID a feasible option, as determined by the city administrator or his or her designee; 
2.	Adequate ingress/egress for fire apparatus shall be provided as approved by the city administrator or his or her designee after consultation with the City of Palmetto Fire Department; and 
3.	In no circumstance shall a shared or common driveway be less than nine (9) feet in width. 
(c)	Alleys: Alleys ranging in size from ten (10) to eighteen (18) feet in width may be provided where they reduce the overall amount of pervious surface on the site while providing necessary access to residences or businesses. Alleys must be designed to have a minimum of two (2) access points for emergency vehicle ingress and egress. 
(12)	Curbs and stormwater: The city administrator or his or her designee may waive the requirement for curbs at the recommendation of the city engineer. In general, curbs shall be installed along all roadways exceeding a six (6) percent slope. Along roadways or portions of a roadway where the slope is three (3) percent or less, and along which sufficient right-of-way area exists to support natural stormwater drainage elements, the city administrator or his or her designee may require curb breaks to allow for stormwater drainage and to reduce the need for stormwater infrastructure construction. Curb breaks shall be twelve (12) inches in width and shall be designed to connect roadway stormwater runoff with landscaped bioretention areas. In instances where curbs are not required, the commission may require the use of curbless catch basins to drain low points in roadways where stormwater might otherwise collect. 
(13)	Swales. Use shallow grassed roadside swales, boulevards and sunken parking lot islands with check dams instead of curb and gutter storm drain systems to handle runoff, wherever possible. 
(14)	Medians. Pervious medians created for the purpose of bioretention, stormwater management or landscape beautification may be approved by the city administrator or his or her designee. Design for pervious traffic islands and stormwater management features shall be subject to approval by the city. 
(15)	Alternative plans and standards. In instances where an applicant can demonstrate that he or she can adhere to these design standards but that an alternate plan better protects the health, safety or welfare of the community, the city administrator or his or her designee may waive these standards. The city administrator or his or her designee may base its decision in part on the recommendations of the city engineer and fire marshal. 
( Ord. No. 2015-06 , §§ 10—12, 5-4-2015) 
Sec. D. - Design standards for grading and drainage. 
All grading and drainage shall conform to the city design and construction standards. In the absence of such standards, the following requirements shall apply as well as good current practice as approved by the city. 
(1)	Run-off computations. Drainage run-off shall be computed in conformance with generally accepted engineering methods for twenty-year storm, and such computations shall be submitted with the final engineering plans. For tributary areas of less than fifty (50) acres, design run-off shall not be less than three (3) cfs/ac. 
(2)	Storm conduits. 
(a)	The minimum allowable pipe size shall be fifteen-inch diameter. 
(b)	All pipes shall be sized using the Manning formula with "n" = 0.013. 
(c)	Minimum permitted pipe gradient is that which provides two and five-tenths (2.5) feet per second velocity when pipe is flowing two-thirds ( 2/3 ) full. 
(d)	Sewer lines, if required, of thirty-inch diameter and smaller shall be laid with uniform slope and alignment between drainage structures spaced no more than four hundred (400) feet apart. On larger size lines, horizontal curves and greater structure separation may be permitted. 
(e)	All storm conduits shall have a minimum earth and/or pavement cover of one (1) foot. 
(3)	Headwalls. Headwalls shall be provided at inlet and outlet points of all drainage systems. Spillway aprons and energy dissipators shall be provided integral with effluent headwalls when design velocities exceed ten (10) feet per second when flowing two-thirds ( 2/3 ) full. 
(4)	Catch basins. Catch basins shall be provided at the upstream end of the intersection of streets, and at intermediate points as required for adequate drainage. 
(5)	Area drains and grates. Area drains and grates may be utilized in paved areas other than dedicated streets. 
(6)	Manholes. Manhole tops shall be above high water elevation or be provided with locking cover. Where possible, manholes shall be located within paved areas. 
(7)	Improved channels. Creation of new or modified open drainage channels shall be utilized only after individual review and approval by the planning and zoning board. Principal factors to be considered are erosion control, effect on lower lying properties and public safety. 
(8)	Swales. No swale or drainage ditch will be allowed to empty onto any public street, and no swale or ditch shall be constructed in fill ground unless the bottom and sidewalls are improved, and approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(9)	Drainage easements. 
(a)	A minimum ten-foot surface drainage easement shall be provided along all lot lines and along the boundary lines of the subdivision unless such requirement is waived by the planning and zoning board. 
(b)	An easement shall be provided along all natural or constructed channels of a width extending five (5) feet beyond the top of the channel bank. 
(c)	An easement shall be provided for all off right-of-way storm conduits and structures. Such easement shall extend a minimum of four (4) feet out from the outermost part of conduits and structures, but shall not be less than ten (10) feet in total width. 
Sub-Article 3. - Final Water System Plan Requirements 

Sec. A. - Information to be shown on water plans. 
An overall project map showing location of all water lines, valves, fire hydrants and other appurtenances relative to streets, lot lines, lot elevations, channels, structures and other project features significant to proposed water system improvements. 
Sec. B. - Design and construction standards. 
All water lines and appurtenances shall conform to the city design and construction standards. In the absence of such standards, good current practice in the area shall be followed as approved by the city. 
Sec. C. - Submission of final engineering plans—Water. 
Upon tentative approval of the water portion of the final engineering plans by the city, the subdivider shall submit three (3) copies to the city administrator. The city administrator will forward the copies to the state department of natural resources environmental protection division for state and final city approval. 
Sub-Article 4. - Final Sanitary Sewerage System Plan Requirements. 

Sec. A. - Information to be shown on sanitary sewer plans. 
(1)	An overall project map showing location of all sewer lines, if any, relative to streets, lot lines, lot elevations, channels, structures and other project features significant to proposed sewer lines, if any. 
(2)	Plan and profile of sanitary sewers and appurtenances showing: 
(a)	Stations at every one hundred (100) feet and at appurtenances. 
(b)	Size of proposed pipe or structure. 
(c)	Manholes with proposed elevations for tops and inverts to the nearest hundredth of a foot. 
(d)	All stream crossings. 
(e)	Profile of existing ground and finished ground at centerline of pipe together with invert and crown lines of pipe. 
(f)	Distance and percent grade between manholes. 
(g)	All existing or proposed sewer line easements. 
(h)	The size and type or class of sewer pipe to be installed. 
(i)	The location of all storm sewers as required to demonstrate freedom of conflict between sanitary and storm sewers. 
(j)	Location and detail of all sanitary sewer service stubouts. 
(k)	Station and deflection angle at each manhole. 
(l)	Location and details of any proposed lift stations. 
Sec. B. - Information to be shown on plans where septic tanks are proposed. 
(1)	A location map showing the subdivision in relation to nearby built-up areas. This map may be presented as a small insert or as a full sheet-size map. 
(2)	Identification of each lot within the subdivision indicating whether or not the lot has been approved for a septic tank installation by the Fulton/Coweta County health department. 
(3)	All data and plans submitted to the Fulton/Coweta County health department relating to lots which are approved for septic tanks shall be included on the subdivision plans. The same plans may be used to meet subdivision regulations and health department requirements, provided the plans meet the standards of each agency. 
Sec. C. - Information to be shown on plans where community disposal system is proposed. 
Complete and detailed construction plans and specifications acceptable to county and state authorities shall be required. 
Sec. D. - Design and construction standards. 
All sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall conform to the city design and construction standards. In the absence of such standards, good current practice in the area shall be followed as approved by the city. 
Sec. E. - Submission of final engineering plans—Sewer 
Upon tentative approval of the sanitary sewer portions of the final engineering plans by the city, the subdivider shall submit three (3) copies to the city administrator. The city administrator will forward the copies to the state department of natural resources environmental protection division for state and final city approval. 
Sub-Article 5. - Final Electrical Distribution Plan Requirements. 

Sec. A. - General. 
Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider will provide other necessary documents to the city for design of the electrical distribution system by the city's registered electrical consultant. 
Sec. B. - Design costs. 
Costs related to the engineering design of the electrical system shall be borne by the subdivider. 
ARTICLE XII. - FINAL ENGINEERING PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR LARGE-SCALE AND COMMON-OWNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. A. - Applicability. 
In addition to other requirements of these regulations, this article prescribes special requirements for: 
(1)	Large-scale community or neighborhood units, such as housing projects and shopping centers which are not subdivided into customary lots, blocks and streets; and 
(2)	Development which includes subdivider construction of any community building or structure (such as swimming pools, community club house, riding stables, dams and lakes created thereby, golf courses, etc.) 
Sec. B. - Information to be shown on all large-scale and common ownership development engineering plans. 
The following is required information to be shown on final engineering plans: 
(1)	Approximate scale and generalized outline in plans of all multi-occupancy buildings, grouped or clustered buildings, and community buildings, and community buildings or structures together with dimensions and tabular data demonstrating how provisions of the zoning ordinance are to be met. 
(2)	Detailed engineering design for any dam or artificial lake. 
(3)	Streets, walks, storm and sanitary sewers, water distribution lines and appurtenances with clear indication of dedication limits. All such improvements, whether or not dedicated, shall meet design requirements of these regulations except where provisions of city buildings codes assume jurisdiction. 
ARTICLE XIII. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES 

Sec. A. - Application for final plat approval. 
Submission of a final plat to the planning and zoning board and the mayor and council by a subdivider shall occur when a currently valid preliminary plat has previously been tentatively approved by the planning and zoning board, and the following have been received at the office of the city administrator: 
(1)	A final plat filing fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). 
(2)	Payment of costs relating to design of the electrical distribution system. 
(3)	Eight (8) copies of the final plat. 
Sec. B. - Review procedures for final plat. 
The review procedures described for the preliminary plat (article VII, section B.) shall be followed in reviewing the final plat. However, once a recommendation on the final plat has been provided by the planning and zoning board, the final plat is then presented to the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall provide the final decision of the city with respect to the final plat. 
Sec. C. - Final plat approval. 
Approval of the final plat shall be given only after the planning and zoning board and the mayor and council have made the following determinations: 
(1)	The final plat meets all requirements of these subdivision regulations. 
(2)	The final engineering plans meet all requirements of these subdivision regulations. 
(3)	Payment of required street and utility inspection fee. 
Sec. E. - Electrical distribution construction. 
Construction of electrical distribution improvements shall be performed by the city or its authorized contractor. 
Sec. F. - Inspection. 
Construction of all streets and utilities to be deeded to the city shall be inspected and tested by the city engineer before acceptance. Payment for the inspection work will be borne by the subdivider. The amount of payment required will be determined by the city administrator. See item 3 under Section C, final plat approval. 
Sec. G. - Bonds or escrow. 
After approval of the final plat, building construction or issuance of building permits shall be permitted provided that the subdivider furnishes to the city a performance bond or escrow account in the form required by the mayor and council. Such performance bond or escrow account shall guarantee the satisfactory completion of those improvements or portion of those improvements not already installed and shown on the final engineering plans within a period of one (1) year after approval of the final plat, unless a longer period is agreed to by the mayor and council due to the size and/or complexity of the improvements. The amount of the bond or escrow account shall be not less than the estimated cost as determined by the city engineer of final engineering plan improvements to be constructed. 
The full amount of performance bonds or escrow accounts shall remain in force until satisfactory completion of final engineering plan improvements. 
PART IV. - THE DOCUMENTS OF RECORD 
ARTICLE XIV. - RECORD DOCUMENT PARTS 
The record documents consist of the final plat and the final engineering plans, both corrected to show any authorized changes made during construction, together with other specific document requirements described herein. 
ARTICLE XV. - SUBDIVISION PLAT OF RECORD REQUIREMENTS 
Required plat certifications. 
(1)	The preliminary plat shall contain the following statements: 
(a)	Preliminary plat certification to read as follows: "I hereby submit this preliminary plat as authorized agent/owner of all property shown thereon, and certify that all contiguous property under my ownership and control is included within the boundaries of this preliminary plat, as required by the Subdivision Regulations." 
____________      ____________ 
Signature of Authorized  Agent/Owner       Date      
(b)	Preliminary plat approval statement to read as follows: "This preliminary plat has been reviewed and approved for general compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, Development Regulations, and Subdivision Regulations of the City of Palmetto, Georgia." 
____________      ____________ 
Chairman, Planning  and Zoning Board       Date      
(2)	The final plat shall contain the following statements: 
(a)	Surveyor's certification to read as follows: "It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct as to the property lines and all improvements shown thereon, and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments and markers shown thereon actually exist, and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown. The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one (1) foot in ____________ feet and an angular error of ____________ per angle foot, and was adjusted using ____________ rule. This plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one (1) foot in ____________ feet, and contains a total of ____________ acres. The equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements herein was ____________ 
____________      ____________ 
Georgia Land Surveyor       Date      
(b)	Owner's acknowledgement and declaration to read as follows: 
(STATE OF GEORGIA) 
(COUNTY OF FULTON) 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates to the use of the public forever, all streets, street rights-of-way, sanitary sewers and appurtenances, sanitary sewer easements, potable water mains and appurtenances, potable water easements, storm drains and appurtenances within street rights-of-way, and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown which comprise a total of ____________ acres, for the purposes therein expressed. 
(c)	Health department approval to read as follows (for subdivisions with septic systems only): "The lots shown herein have been reviewed by the Fulton/Coweta County Health Department, and with the exception of lots ____________ , are approved for development. Each lot is to be reviewed by the Health Department and approved for septic system installation prior to the issuance of a building permit." 
____________      ____________ 
Health Department Official       Date      
(d)	Final plat approval to read as follows: "This subdivision has been reviewed by the planning and zoning board and the city engineer and found to be in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, the Development Regulations, and the Subdivision Regulations. The mayor and council hereby approve this final plat, subject to the provisions and requirements of the city's regulations." 
____________      ____________ 
City Clerk       Date      
____________      ____________ 
City Engineer       Date      
____________      ____________ 
Chairman, Planning  and Zoning Board       Date      
____________      ____________ 
Mayor, City of Palmetto       Date      
(e)	The final plat shall contain a tabulation of the areas of street rights-of-way, sanitary sewer easements, potable water easements, and other public facilities to be dedicated to the City. 
ARTICLE XVI. - ENGINEERING PLANS OF RECORD REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. A. - Requirements for the engineering plans of record part of the record documents. 
The engineering plans of record part of the record documents shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	They shall conform with the requirements of the final engineering plan except where modified by this article. 
(2)	They shall show all data, dimensions, plans, profiles, stationing, elevations, materials, etc., corrected to conform with actually constructed improvements. 
Sec. B. - Required certification on the engineering plans of record. 
(1)	An engineer's certification shall be required as follows: "It is hereby certified that these engineering plans have been corrected to accurately show improvements as actually constructed, that I have inspected these improvements during and on completion of construction, and that in my opinion such improvements are suitable for their intended purposes. 
By: ____________ 
    Registered Georgia 
    P.E. No. ____________ " 
ARTICLE XVII. - RECORD DOCUMENTS 

Sec. A. - Recording plat. 
When the record documents are approved, the mayor and council shall authorize the placing of an appropriate certification of such action on the copy of the plat to be recorded. The subdivider shall thereafter promptly have the approved plat of record recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Fulton/Coweta County. The subdivider shall then provide a copy of the recorded plat to the city administrator. 
Sec. B. - Authorized building construction. 
Until the final plat has been approved by the mayor and council: 
(1)	No street or utility improvement shall be deemed to have been accepted or to have otherwise have been given legal status by the mayor and council. 
(2)	No building or other structures within the subdivision shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered unless so permitted by the regulations. 
Sec. C. - Maintenance bond or escrow required. 
As a condition precedent to approval by the mayor and council of the record documents, the subdivider shall have provided a maintenance bond or escrow account guaranteeing maintenance and/or correction of defects in improvements of which the subdivider is notified during a one-year period following the date on which the mayor and council approves the final plat. The maintenance guarantee shall be in a form acceptable to the mayor and council and shall provide funds in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total estimated construction cost of all improvements. 
If maintenance and/or correction of defects is not made within thirty (30) days after mailing written notice to the subdivider at his last known address, the city shall have the authority to make or cause to have made such maintenance and/or correction at the expense of the bonding company or escrow account. Provided, however, at the discretion of the mayor and council based upon (a) weather conditions, (b) labor market, (c) material market, or (d) circumstances beyond the control of the subdivider, the maintenance period may be extended for a definite period of time, sufficient to make the necessary corrections by an agreement in writing executed by the city, the subdivider and his surety. Provided, further, that the subdivider shall be responsible for any damages done to work already completed by him as part of required improvements. 
PART V. - AMENDMENTS AND LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE XVIII. - ADOPTION, AMENDMENTS AND APPEALS 

Sec. A. - Adoption of subdivision regulations. 
Before the mayor and council adopt this ordinance or an amendment to it, the city shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
Sec. B. - Amendment of the subdivision regulations. 
The subdivision regulations may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the planning and zoning board for review and recommendation. The planning and zoning board shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit its report. If the planning and zoning board fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
ARTICLE XIX. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. A. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this ordinance impose more restrictive standards than are required under any other statute, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Sec. B. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. C. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Sec. D. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
The city or any owner of real estate who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation. 
Sec. E. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
So ordained this 1st day of October, 2001. 
        MAYOR AND COUNCIL FOR THE CITY OF PALMETTO 

 
(SEAL) 
Attest: 

 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-05, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, repealed Appendix B, Zoning, and adopted a new Zoning Ordinance. See Code Comparative Table for ordinance history of Appendix B. Please note that replacement provisions have been included in a new Zoning Code that is published as a separate document by the city and is currently not included in this codification. To access the Palmetto, Georgia Zoning Ordinance, please visit the city's website at: www.citypalmetto.com/DocumentCenter/View/29 . To access the Palmetto, Georgia Zoning Map, please visit the city's website at: www.citypalmetto.com/DocumentCenter/View/30 . 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood damage prevention, ch. 10; planning and development, ch. 19; soil erosion, sedimentation control and stormwater management, ch. 21; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference— Grant of zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

APPENDIX C - PALMETTO SIGN ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2006, repealed appendix C, sections 1-1—1-7, 1-11—1-13, 1-21—1-25, 1-31, 1-41—1-45, 1-51—1-55, 1-61—1-71, 1-81, in its entirety and replaced it with a new appendix C, sections 1-1—1-4, 2-1—2-5, 3-1—3-3, 4-1—4-4, 5-1, 5-21—5-25, 5-31—5-39, 6-1. Former appendix C pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 99-10, adopted Sept. 7, 1999; Ord. No. 00-02, § 1, adopted July 3, 2000. In publication, a style (capitalization, treatment of numbers, etc.) consistent with that of the new code has been used. In addition, obvious spelling errors have been corrected. 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Palmetto Sign Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 1-2. - Purpose and intent. 
The mayor and council for the City of Palmetto understands that signs are an integral part of the ability of every person to exercise their right to freedom of speech. It is however, important to understand that there is a fundamental need to protect Palmetto as a whole from the unchecked proliferation of unregulated signage. It is with this understanding in mind that the mayor and council for the City of Palmetto provides the following purposes for the regulation of signage: 
1.	To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; 
2.	To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
3.	To improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
4.	To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property; 
5.	And to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. 
This sign ordinance is adopted under the authority of the city in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this ordinance shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in the zoning ordinance of the city shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinance. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in Article IV. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this ordinance. 
Animated sign. Any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. (Prohibited) 
Awning/canopy sign. Any sign that is a part of, or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. (Prohibited.) 
Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. 
Beacon. Any light with one (1) or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one (1) or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or move. (Prohibited.) 
Billboard. Any sign which exceeds sixty (60) square feet in area. 
Building official. The person, officer or official whom the Mayor and Council has so designated, or his or her designee. 
Canopy/awning sign. See awning/canopy sign. 
Drive-thru/drive-in facility. Any location where products and/or services are distributed to, or business is transacted with, a person seated in a motor vehicle. 
Flag. Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols. 
Flashing sign. A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. (Prohibited.) 
Freestanding sign. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
Illuminated sign, external. A sign illuminated by an external light source. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes, or alternates. 
Illuminated sign, internal. A sign illuminated by an internal light source. 
Kiosk. A small, freestanding structure requiring a building permit which has more than two (2) surfaces. (Prohibited.) 
Lot. A parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for lot area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations. 
Marquee, marquee sign. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. (Prohibited.) 
Moving sign. A sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts. (Prohibited.) 
Mural. See wall sign. 
Nonresidential zoning district. The following are considered nonresidential zoning districts within this ordinance: C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2. 
Out-of-store marketing device. An out-of-store marketing device is any facility which is located outside of a primary building on a site zoned for nonresidential uses. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include: fuel pumps, bank ATM units, newspaper racks, drink machines, ice boxes, and phone booths. 
Pennant, streamer. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. (Prohibited.) 
Permanent sign. Any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. A permanent freestanding sign shall be of a type and construction as to not be easily or readily removed from the lot on which it has been erected. 
Permit. A sign permit reviewed, approved, and issued by the city clerk for the City of Palmetto. 
Person. Any individual, association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Portable sign. Any sign which is capable of being transported, either by trailer or on its own wheels. (Prohibited.) 
Principal building. The building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Nonresidential lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Public sign. Any sign erected by a governmental entity. 
Residential zoning district. The following are considered residential zoning districts within this ordinance: A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4CT, R-5CT, R-7, MHP, R-5, R-6. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure. (Prohibited.) 
Sign. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure affixed to, supported by, or suspended by a stationary object, building, or the ground that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Suspended sign. Any sign which is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building. 
Temporary sign. Any sign that is not permanently mounted. 
Wall sign. Any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one (1) sign surface. No wall sign shall extend more than six (6) inches from any wall, building, or structure. 
Window sign. Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass either inside or outside the building, and is visible from the exterior of the structure. 
Zoning administrator. The person, officer or official whom the mayor and council has so designated, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 1-4. - Powers and duties of personnel. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to administer this ordinance. Unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the mayor and council of the City of Palmetto, the enforcement of this ordinance shall be within the jurisdiction of the Palmetto Police Department and the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITTING 

Sec. 2-1. - Permits required. 
All signage listed herein requiring a permit must meet the requirements of section 2-1(A) when applying for a permit. 
A.	Applications for signage. Applications for sign permits required by this ordinance shall be filed with the city clerk during normal business hours and shall include the following to be considered by the city clerk: 
1.	The name, street address, and phone number of the owner of the property where the sign is to be installed along with a site plan showing the proposed location of the sign on the property. 
2.	If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a signed and notarized authorization by the property owner shall be included with the application. 
3.	A description of the type of sign to be erected which shall include a schematic drawing of the sign indicating overall dimensions (height, width, square footage, shape, and number of faces). 
4.	All applications for signage shall be on a form provided by the city. 
B.	Review and notification. Review of an application deemed to be complete by the city and notification to the applicant of either approval or denial shall in no case extend for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) days from the date of the city's receipt of the completed application. Notification to the applicant can be made either by certified mail return receipt requested, by fax to the number provided on the application, or by hand delivery by the Palmetto Police Department on or before the thirtieth day after the city's receipt of the application. Should the process exceed forty-five (45) days, it shall be deemed that the application is approved and the city shall issue a permit to the applicant. Issuance of a permit shall in no way prevent the city from later declaring the sign to be illegal if the structure fails to substantially comply with the specifications submitted in the application or some new information of illegality is discovered. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 2-2. - Denial, revocation, and suspension. 
A.	The city clerk shall deny all applications for signs that do not comply with this ordinance. Written notification to the applicant listing the reasons for denial shall be provided as set forth in section 2-1(B). 
B.	Revocation of permits and certificates. The city clerk may revoke a sign permit or certificate of compliance in those cases where an administrative determination has been duly made that false statements or misrepresentations existed as to material facts in the application or plans upon which the permit of approval was based. 
C.	Suspension of permits and certificates. The city clerk may suspend a sign permit or certificate of compliance where an administrative determination has been duly made that an error or omission on the part of either the permit applicant or a government agency existed in the issuance of the permit or certificate. A new permit or certificate shall be issued in place of the incorrect permit or certificate after correction of the error or omission. 
D.	Appeals. Any individual whose application has been denied or revoked may appeal the decision of the city clerk to the Palmetto Mayor and Council within 30 days of notification of denial or revocation. Once an applicant has notified the city of their intent to appeal, a hearing will take place within ninety (90) days of the appeal being filed with the city clerk. If a hearing cannot take place within the 90-day limit then the appeal is deemed to be determined in favor of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 2-3. - Inspection. 
A representative of the city shall inspect each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this ordinance from time to time for the purpose of ascertaining whether such structure is safe and lawful. If a sign is deemed to be in need of repair, the owner shall have ten (10) days from the date of written notice from the city, in which to repair or remove such sign. Missing letters from a raised letter or changeable copy sign, peeling paint from a painted sign, etc. shall constitute a need for repair. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 2-4. - Signs which require no permit. 
The following types of signs shall not count toward the total amount of signage allowed in sections 5-22, 5-32, and 5-33: 
1.	Numeral displayed for the purpose of identifying property location, not to exceed eight (8) inches in height; 
2.	Flags: See section 5-25 and 5-38; 
3.	Window signs: See section 5-23, 5-34; 
4.	Door signs not to exceed one (1) square foot in size and not more than one (1) sign per door; and 
5.	Temporary signs in all districts. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 2-5. - Prohibited signs and devices. 
A.	The following signs shall be prohibited under this ordinance. Such signs include, but are not limited to: 
1.	Animated or flashing signs; 
2.	Rotating signs, or any sign which requires either natural or artificial wind current for motion or gives the appearance of movement; 
3.	Portable signs when not attached to a motor vehicle. Signs attached to or painted on vehicles which prevent the vehicle from being used for its intended purpose and that are legible from the public right-of-way are also considered portable signs; 
4.	Search lights, beacons, or similar devices; 
5.	Roof signs; 
6.	Pennants, streamers; 
7.	Attention-getting devices, including but not limited to balloons (including all inflatable air signs and lights), shall not be used to attract attention to any sign or business. This includes neon tubing or bare bulb lights encircling a window or outlining the structure; 
8.	Signs or other advertising structures that contain obscene or indecent material: 
a.	Material is obscene if all of the following apply: 
(1)	To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; and 
(2)	The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined in subparagraphs 1 through 5 of this paragraph: (1) acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; (2) acts of masturbation; (3) acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; (4) acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or (5) sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship; 
b.	Material is indecent if the sign depicts the following portions of human anatomy: (1) Any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; (2) Any portion of the male or female public hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and/or genitals; 
9.	No lettering, logos or other graphics are allowed on any awning, canopy (including a gasoline canopy), marquee, or other similar device; 
10.	Kiosks; 
11.	Changeable copy signs; 
12.	All signs attached to light poles, power poles or trees (when in the right of way); 
13.	Any privately owned sign located within or partially within any public right-of-way; 
14.	Reserved. 
15.	Wall signs in residential districts; 
16.	Sidewalk, sandwich, or curb-type sign (except as otherwise provided); and 
17.	Satellite dish antenna signs. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06; Ord. No. 2010-01, 5-3-2010) 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 3-1. - Violations, penalties. 
A.	No person shall erect on any premises owned or controlled by him/her any sign which does not comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.	No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him/her any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises, or as otherwise provided for in this ordinance. 
C.	Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions herein. 
D.	Any violation of this ordinance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
E.	In case any sign or other device covered by this ordinance is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this ordinance, the Palmetto Police Department shall issue a citation. Additionally, the city may seek an injunction for a continuing violation or take other appropriate action to prevent, correct or abate such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use. Any violation of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor and the violator will be subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for up to sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 3-2. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.	Nonconforming existing signs. A freestanding or wall sign for which a sign permit was issued or which was in existence on August 7, 2006 or which was constructed in accordance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in effect on the date of its construction, but which by reason of its size, height, location, design or construction is not in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance, shall be considered a nonconforming sign. Such a sign shall be allowed to remain in place and be maintained (provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of the nonconformity) until there is a change of business name (single business), a change of complex name (multi-business), or the sign and/or supporting structure is totally destroyed as a result of natural causes, acts of God, vandalism or any other cause. In the case of a change of ownership where the business name and existing signage (face and structure) remain the same, said sign shall be allowed to remain in place. 
B.	Lapse of nonconforming sign permit. A nonconforming sign permit shall lapse and become void under the same circumstances as those under which any other sign permit may lapse and become void. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 3-3. - Removal of unlawful or dangerous signs. 
A.	Removal. The city may order the removal of any sign that is in violation of this ordinance by written notice to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit has been issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. 
B.	Procedure following removal order. If the sign is not removed within fourteen (14) days after the order of removal (or fourteen (14) days after the date any appeal becomes final), the city shall remove or cause the removal of the sign and shall collect the costs thereof as provided below. 
C.	Removal without notice. The city shall remove any sign that is in violation of this ordinance, without giving notice to any party, if: 
1.	Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
2.	Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any member(s) of the public. 
D.	Reclamation/fees. Following such removal or repair, the city may collect the costs as set by the mayor and council for the City of Palmetto for any reclaimed signs. Signs not claimed will be destroyed after fourteen (14) days. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
ARTICLE IV. - MEASUREMENT; CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 4-1. - Sign location. 
A.	Obstructions to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
B.	Signs not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or part thereof, except authorized traffic signs, shall be located in any state or city right-of-way. No sign may be located any closer than twenty (20) feet from an intersection, as measured from the intersection of the two (2) rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 4-2. - Measurement of sign area. 
Freestanding sign. The area of a sign shall be computed as the entire area within the continuous perimeter, enclosing the limits of all writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character. This shall also include any open space(s) or color(s), forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 4-3. - Measurement of sign height. 
A.	The height of a sign shall be computed as to the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: (1) existing grade prior to construction, or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is greater. Where the normal grade is below the normal grade of a public street, the sign base can be raised to the elevation of the normal grade of the street before the height limitations are applied (surveyor's certificate required). 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 4-4. - Construction standards. 
A.	All signs permitted under this code shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable building codes. The city may remove, after due notice per section 3-3, any sign which shows neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
B.	Face of sign shall be smooth. No sign or other advertising structure shall be constructed so as to have nails, tacks, or wires protruding therefrom. 
C.	Illumination of signs. Signs, when illumination is permitted, may be illuminated internally or externally. Neon tubing may be used to spell the business name on a wall sign only, and shall be entirely encased within a sign cabinet. 
D.	Landscaping, weeds, and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath, and around the base of ground signs. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
ARTICLE V. - RESTRICTIONS BASED ON LOCATION 
DIVISION I. - GENERALLY. 

Sec. 5-1. - Zoning districts. 
A.	Sign standards by district apply to all zoning districts in Palmetto. The districts are defined herein as being either residential or nonresidential. 
B.	Residential zoning districts allow for both residential and nonresidential uses and as such will be governed by the respective articles of this ordinance based on the approved use. For all unimproved residential property the residential sign regulations shall apply. For all nonresidential uses permitted in residential zoning districts, the signage allowances for those uses shall be determined to be under article V, division III of this ordinance. 
C.	Nonresidential zoning districts allow for both nonresidential and residential uses and as such will be governed by the respective articles of this ordinance based on the approved use. For all unimproved nonresidential property the single business sign regulations shall apply (see section 5-32). For all residential uses permitted in the nonresidential zoning district, the signage allowances for those uses shall be determined to be under article V, division II of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Secs. 5-2—5-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION II. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 5-21. - Signs allowed within residential zoning districts. 
A.	The following signs shall be allowed in all residential zoning districts: 
1.	Freestanding signs: See section 5-22; 
2.	Window signs: See section 5-23; 
3.	Signage during construction: See section 5-24; and 
4.	Flags: See section 5-25. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-22. - Residential freestanding signs. 
A.	Unless otherwise provided for herein, lots located in a residential zoning district shall be allowed no more than three (3) freestanding signs not to exceed six (6) square feet each sign and not more than one (1) such sign can be permanent. Signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height as measured from the grade level of any adjacent street. Sign structures shall not exceed five (5) feet in height. Banners shall be exempt from this section. All permanent signs shall require a permit. 
B.	Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the sign area of signs at the entrance of a residential development shall be limited to thirty-five (35) square feet and five (5) feet in height. If used in conjunction with a wall, the wall shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. The decorative facade, including post and/or columns, shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. No more than two (2) signs shall be allowed to be placed at each entrance of a subdivision. Signs shall be placed on common property under the ownership of the Home Owners Association (HOA) and shall not be allowed to be on private property. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
C.	Banners shall not be more than twenty-four (24) square feet in size to be displayed not more than thirty (30) days in a calendar year. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet nor extend more than four (4) feet above grade when mounted on the ground. A permit shall be required. 
D.	For any multi-family residential property, the number of allowable freestanding signs shall not exceed six (6) signs not more than six (6) square feet in area each. Such developments shall also be entitled to two (2) permanent sign at the entrance to the development as regulated in section 5-22(B). The property owner shall be responsible for all signage posted on the property. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-23. - Window signs. 
Not more than three (3) window signs shall be allowed on lots in all residential districts and no window sign shall be larger than six (6) square feet or cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of each window in which a sign is placed, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-24. - Signage during construction. 
A.	One (1) additional sign shall be allowed during construction per lot in a residential district. Said sign shall not be internally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
1.	Duration. Said sign shall be allowed beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
2.	Size. Said sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area nor five (5) feet in height. 
B.	This sign is in addition to the number of signs allowed in section 5-22. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-25. - Flags. 
Every parcel may display no more than one (1) flag and/or flagpole. The flagpole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. Flag dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flag is not more than fifty (50) percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Secs. 5-26—5-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION III. - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 5-31. - Signs allowed within nonresidential zoning districts. 
A.	The following signs shall be allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts: 
1.	Freestanding signs: See section 5-32; 
2.	Wall signs: See section 5-33; 
3.	Window signs: See section 5-34; 
4.	Banners: See section 5-35; 
5.	Signage during construction: See section 5-36; 
6.	Out-of-store marketing device: See section 5-37; 
7.	Flags: See section 5-38; and 
8.	Suspended signs. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-32. - Freestanding signs. 
A.	Unless otherwise provided herein each parcel is allowed one (1) freestanding sign, not to exceed six (6) feet in height, eight (8) feet in width and not more than thirty-five (35) square feet in area. 
B.	Each parcel containing multi-businesses, shall be entitled to display one (1) permanent freestanding sign. Individual business names are included in the total square footage. The maximum area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, eight (8) feet in width and not more than forty (40) square feet in area. 
C.	Freestanding signs may be internally or externally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
D.	All signs which are part of a drive-thru or drive-in facility and are not legible to the traveling public shall be permitted without regard to number of signs per parcel but, no such sign shall exceed six (6) feet in height. 
E.	Temporary signage. Each parcel containing a single business shall be allowed not more than two (2) temporary signs. Each parcel containing multiple businesses shall be allowed not more than four (4) temporary signs. Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area nor four (4) feet in overall height. For all lots containing multiple businesses, the property owner shall be responsible for all signage placed on the property, regardless of who erects the sign. 
F.	Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the area of signs at the entrance of a subdivision shall be limited to thirty-five (35) square feet and five (5) feet in height. If used in conjunction with a wall, the wall shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. The decorative facade, including post and/or columns, shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. No more than two (2) signs shall be allowed to be placed at each entrance of a subdivision. Signs shall be placed on common property under the ownership of the Property Owners Association (POA) and shall not be allowed to be on private property. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06; Ord. No. 2010-01, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 5-33. - Wall signs. 
A.	Wall signs shall be located on the principal structure only, and may be internally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
1.	Number. Each parcel containing a single business shall be allowed not more than one (1) wall sign. On parcels containing multiple businesses, each business shall be allowed a wall sign. 
2.	Location. No wall sign shall be placed on any roof or on top of any structure. In addition, no part of a wall sign shall be at an elevation higher than twenty-five (25) feet above the average ground level elevation along the side of the building on which the wall sign is installed. If a building has two (2) or more stories, no signs shall be installed at a level above the bottom of the second floor windows, unless the building is a multi-tenant office or multi-tenant commercial structure wherein tenants have primary, direct access from their space to the outside. This access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designed for public use. 
3.	Erection. All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall, subject to the approval of the building official. 
4.	Size/calculation. No sign area shall exceed ten (10) percent of the wall area of the leased/occupied space on which the sign is mounted. If the sign is a panel or box, the total area including background is included. If a sign consists of individual letters, each attached directly to a building or structure, the area of the sign shall be measured by the area of the smallest rectangle or series of contiguous rectangles which enclose all the letters. 
B.	Mural graphics shall be permitted. Such signs may not be internally illuminated. Murals are allowed in lieu of wall signage but cannot cover more area than would be allowed in section 5-33(4). A permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-34. - Window signs. 
Any sign that is visible inside a building within ten (10) feet of a window is considered a window sign. No more than fifty (50) percent or thirty-five (35) square feet, whichever is less, of the total available advertising space (glass area) shall be used to display window signs. Such signs may not be illuminated. No window signs are allowed above the first floor unless the building is a multi-tenant office or commercial structure wherein tenants have primary direct access from their space to the outside. This access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designed for public use. In no case shall any window signs be installed above the level of the second floor windows. No permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-35. - Banners. 
Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding fourteen (14) days with not more than three (3) such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. In the case of lots which contain multiple businesses, each business will get a banner. 
A.	Banners shall not be more than thirty-two (32) square feet. A permit shall be required. 
B.	No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet nor extend more than five (5) feet above grade when on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-36. - Signage during construction. 
A.	One (1) additional sign shall be allowed during construction. Said sign shall not be internally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
1.	Duration. Said sign shall be allowed beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
2.	Size. Said sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area nor five (5) feet in height. 
B.	This sign is in addition to the number of signs allowed in section 5-32. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-37. - Out-of-store marketing device. 
One (1) sign shall be allowed on an out-of-store marketing device. Said sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet. The height of the sign shall not be more than two (2) feet above the device. Said sign shall not be illuminated except for illumination intrinsic to the device. No permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-38. - Flags. 
Every parcel may display no more than three (3) flags and or flagpoles. Flagpoles shall not exceed seventy (70) feet in height. Flag dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flag is not more than fifty (50) percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-39. - Suspended signs. 
In a multi-tenant commercial or office building, in addition to all other permitted signs, one (1) projecting non-illuminated sign per entrance used shall be allowed to identify the location of each tenant's premises. A permit shall be required. Suspended signs shall adhere to the following: 
1.	Does not exceed three (3) square feet in area; 
2.	Is uniform in size, material, color and shape and is placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building; 
3.	Is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building; and 
4.	Maintains a minimum of seven (7) feet clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
Sec. 5-40. - Billboards. 
A.	Billboards are only permitted on properties that are located within the Interstate (I-85) corridor in M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. This corridor shall extend from the I-85 right-of-way a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet. The minimum setback from any public street right-of-way or property line, other than I-85, is fifty (50) feet. 
B.	Billboards shall be no closer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet from another billboard and shall not protrude into the I-85 right-of-way or city right-of-way. 
C.	Billboards shall not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet or fourteen (14) feet in height or fifty-two (52) feet in length inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members. However, additional size and dimensional allowance for extensions or protrusions from the basic geometric shape of the sign may be permitted up to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the basic sign area. 
D.	No billboard shall contain more than two faces not to exceed seven hundred (700) square feet per face, exclusive of the allowance permitted for extensions and protrusions, visible from the same direction on the main traveled road (I-85). 
E.	The height of all billboard signs at their highest point above level of ground shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 5-3-2010) 
ARTICLE VI. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 6-1. - Severability. 
Should any article, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the mayor and council for the City of Palmetto that each article, clause and provision hereof be severable. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 8-7-06) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1977 CODE 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1977 Code, as updated through May 1, 1978, which are included herein. Sections of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1977 Code, as updated through May 1, 1978, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1977 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text of references to the state law or related matters. 

 

 