THE	CODE	OF	THE	CITY	OF	UNADILLA,	GEORGIA
____________
Published by Order of the Mayor and Council
____________
Adopted May 24, 2005
____________
M MUNICIPAL	CODE	CORPORATION
CC Tallahassee,	Florida 	 	 2005
OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
UNADILLA, GEORGIA
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION
____________
Sidney W. Hughes
Mayor
____________
Tony Lester
Bobby West
Jeffery Minor
Russell Anderson
James Dupree
Greg Speight
City Council
____________
Charles Walker
City Manager
____________
David Walker
City Attorney
____________
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
2/240
Gail Kendrick
City Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Unadilla, Georgia.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the prior code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and
council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note
indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing
in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior code and any subsequent ordinance included herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been
catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included.
A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each
section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the
dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of
chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their
proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come
between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be
included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of
divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or
division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical
arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents
a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a
chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the
letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which
may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:
CHARTER CHT:1
RELATED	LAWS RL:1
CHARTER	COMPARATIVE	TABLE CHTCT:1
RELATED	LAWS	COMPARATIVE	TABLE RLCT:1
CODE CD1:1
CODE	APPENDIX CDA:1
CODE	COMPARATIVE	TABLES CCT:1
STATE	LAW	REFERENCE	TABLE SLT:1
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
3/240
CHARTER	AND	RELATED	LAWS	INDEX CHTRLi:1
CODE	INDEX CDi:1
Indexes
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which
are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and
employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the
particular item in which the user is interested.
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the
publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be
reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new
pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it
will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly
recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition,
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Code Attorney, and Bill Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation,
Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance
throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Charles Walker, City Manager, and Mr. David G. Walker, City Attorney, for their cooperation and
assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code
of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day
administration of the city's affairs.
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Unadilla, Georgia. Editorial
enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes;
cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may
not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of
Unadilla, Georgia.
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Unadilla, Georgia. 2005.
Ordinance No. 2005-1
ORDINANCE
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF UNADILLA HEREBY ORDAINS
as follows:
1.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
4/240
The code entitled "The Code of Unadilla, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1-66, each
inclusive, is adopted.
2.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 24, 2005, and not included in the Code or recognized
and continued in force by reference therein are repealed.
3.
The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
4.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or
regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be fined not exceeding $1,000.00, and by imprisonment in the city or county jail not
to exceed six months, and to work in the city streets and public works not exceeding 90 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be
inflicted, and the fines imposed therefore may be collected by execution. Each day any such violation shall continue shall be a separate
offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section
whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits.
5.
Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the
Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.
6.
Ordinances adopted after May 24, 2005, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if
they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
7.
This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.
SO ENACTED this 24 day May, 2005.
CITY OF UNADILLA, GEORGIA
By:
SIDNEY HUGHES, MAYOR
Attest:
GAIL KENDRICK, CITY CLERK
1 Reading: May 12, 2005 ;le=1.5p;
2 Reading: May 24, 2005
SUPPLEMENT	HISTORY	TABLE
th
st
nd
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
5/240
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in
each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes."
Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits."
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture
of the Code's historical evolution.
Ord.	No. Date
Adopted
Included/
Omitted
Supp.	No.
10-6  5-11-2010 Included 6
11-1  1-11-2011 Included 6
11-2  3- 8-2011 Included 7
11-3  4-12-2011 Included 7
2011-4  5-24-2011 Included 8
11-5  8- 9-2011 Omitted 8
2011-6  8-23-2011 Included 8
2011-7 11-15-2011 Included 8
PART	I	-	CHARTER	AND	RELATED	LAWS
Subpart	A
CHARTER
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1977 Ga. Laws, page 3079 which provides a charter for the city. Amendments to the act are indicated by
parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged
from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings,
catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
ARTICLE	I.	-	INCORPORATION,	POWERS
Section	1.10.	-	Incorporation.
This Act shall constitute the whole Charter of the City of Unadilla, repealing and replacing the charter provided by an Act of the General
Assembly, approved August 10, 1920 (Ga. L. 1920, p. 1705), as amended. The City of Unadilla, Georgia, in the County of Dooly and the
inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the Mayor and
Council of Unadilla, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all the
courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure.
(1)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
6/240
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Section	1.11.	-	Corporate	boundaries.
The boundaries of the City of Unadilla shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such
alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the City of Unadilla,
at all times, shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of City Clerk and to be designated: "City of
Unadilla, Georgia". Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map.
Such entries or additions shall be made by and under the directions of the Mayor. Photographic or other copies of such map
certified by the Mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original
map.
The mayor and council may provide for the redrawing of any such map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the
earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace.
Section	1.11A.	-	[Addition	to	territory	of	corporate	limits.]
In addition to any other territory lying within the corporate limits of the City of Unadilla, such corporate limits shall also include the
following:
All those tracts or parcels of land in Land Lot 42 of the Third District of Dooly County, Georgia, being known and designated as Parcel
`A', containing 9.09 acres, Parcel 'B-1', containing 0.84 acres and Parcel 'B-2' containing 1.63 acres according to a plat of survey prepared
for Campground Development Services by Jones Surveying Company on December 20, 1974, a copy of said plat being recorded in Plat
Book 4, Page 170, Clerk's Office, Dooly Superior Court. Said plat and the recorded copy thereof are hereby made a part of this description
by reference thereto for all purposes.
(1989 Ga. Laws, page 4027)
Section	1.12.	-	Examples	of	powers.
The corporate powers of this City may include but shall not be limited to the following:
Property Taxes. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation and collection of taxes on all property
subject to taxation;
Other Taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by State law;
Business Regulation and Taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges,
occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of
payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any City taxes or
fees;
Appropriations and Expenditures. To make appropriations for the government of the City; to authorize the expenditure
of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the
laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the City;
Municipal Debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the City and to issue bonds for the
purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the
State of Georgia;
Municipal Property Ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed
property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the City;
Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and
duties of the City and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may
impose;
Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the City for present or future use, and for
any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia of
1933, as amended, or under other applicable general laws of the State of Georgia as are or may be enacted or amended;
Municipal Utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including but not
limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
7/240
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations
and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall
be enforced;
Public Utilities and Services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services; to prescribe the
rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise
grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Georgia Public Service Commission;
Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave,
curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, present erosion of, and light roads,
alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the City; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the
streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities;
Public Improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways,
parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public
housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational,
conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any
other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the City; and to regulate the use thereof, and for
such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia of 1933, as
amended, or other applicable general laws of the State of Georgia, as are or may be enacted or amended;
Sidewalk Maintenance. To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining
their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and
maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so;
Building Regulation. To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building,
housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and
building trades; to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures;
Planning and Zoning. To provide such comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; subdivision regulation
and the like as the City Council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing
community;
Public Peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances;
Special Areas of Public Regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawn shops; the manufacture, sale or
transportation of alcoholic beverages; the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of
combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or
situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant
trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; to license, tax,
regulate or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors;
Regulation of Roadside Areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs,
billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rightsof-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the City and to prescribe
penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances;
Health and Sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such
standards;
Air and Water Pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the
pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the City;
Fire Regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire
safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting,
and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof;
Public Hazards, Removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or
might become dangerous or detrimental to the public;
Solid Waste Disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the
collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin,
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
8/240
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
(41)
(42)
aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items;
Garbage Fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary
service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the City from all individuals, firms,
and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such
charges, taxes, or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges;
Sewer Fees. To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating,
maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the
sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and
method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; to charge, impose and collect a sewer
connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the
sewerage system;
Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property;
Municipal Property Protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the City and
the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof;
Jail Sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the City's court may work out such sentence in any public
works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the City; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any
county work camp or jail or agreement with the appropriate county officials;
Animal Regulations. To regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to
provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition
by sale, gift, or humane disposal, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of
the ordinance enacted hereunder;
Motor Vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon
or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the City;
Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the City; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the
operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liabilities insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed
by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles;
Pensions. To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the City;
Special Assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public
improvements;
Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and
corporations providing for services to be made therefor;
City Agencies and Delegation of Power. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and
agencies of the City, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the
powers conferred upon or delegated to same;
Penalties. To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the
laws of the State of Georgia;
Police and Fire Protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen and to organize and
operate a fire fighting agency;
Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or
without the City, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an
emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the City;
Urban Redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program.
Public Transportation. To organize such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial;
General Health, Safety and Welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is
detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the City and to provide for the
enforcement of such standards;
Other Powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
9/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the City
and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter
as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future
authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of
particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases
granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under
the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia.
Section	1.13.	-	Exercise	of	powers.
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the City, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as
provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by
pertinent laws of the State of Georgia.
ARTICLE	II.	-	GOVERNING	BODY
Section	2.10.	-	Creation;	composition;	number;	election.
The governing authority of this City shall be composed of a Mayor and six Councilmen who shall be elected in the manner provided by
Article V of this charter.
Section	2.11.	-	Terms	and	qualication	of	oce.
The members of the governing body shall serve for terms of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No
person shall be eligible to serve as Mayor or Councilman unless he shall have been a resident of the City for a period of one year immediately
prior to the date of the election of Mayor or members of the Council and shall continue to reside therein during his period of service and shall
be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City.
Section	2.12.	-	Vacancy;	lling	of;	forfeiture	of	oce.
The office of Mayor or Councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or
removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia.
A vacancy in the office of Mayor or Councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for
in Article V of this charter.
The Mayor or any Councilman shall forfeit his office if he:
lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the
State of Georgia;
willfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this charter; or
is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
Section	2.13.	-	Compensation	and	expenses.
The salaries of the Mayor and Council of the City shall be fixed by said Mayor and Council at the first regularly scheduled meeting in the
month following the City's regular election except as otherwise limited by the general laws of the State of Georgia. The Mayor and
Councilmen shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
Section	2.14.	-	Prohibitions.
Except as authorized by law, no member of the Council shall hold any other elective City office or City employment during the term for
which he was elected.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
10/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Section	2.15.	-	Code	of	Ethics.
The Council may enact by ordinance a Code of Ethics which shall apply to all elected officials, appointed officers and employees of this
City.
Section	2.16.	-	Inquiries	and	investigations.
The Council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the City and the conduct of any department, office, or agencies
thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person
who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the Council shall be punished as provided by ordinance.
Section	2.17.	-	General	power	and	authority	of	the	council.
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the Council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this
City as provided by Article I of this charter.
In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the Council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the
creation of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, the Constitution and the laws
of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life,
property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of this City. The Council
may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for the violation thereof.
The Council may by ordinance, create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies and departments of the City and
may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies and departments expressly provided for by this charter.
Section	2.18.	-	Chief	executive	ocer.
The Mayor shall be the chief executive of this City. He shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the City
under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter.
Section	2.19.	-	Powers	and	duties	of	mayor.
As the chief executive of the City, the Mayor:
shall see that all laws and ordinances of the City are faithfully executed;
shall preside at all meetings of the Mayor and Council and vote in the event of a tie vote among the Council;
may appoint and remove all officers, department heads, and employees of the City by and with the consent of Council as
otherwise provided for in this charter;
shall exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the City and provide for the coordination of
administrative activities;
may prepare and submit to the Council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget;
may submit to the Council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the City and from time to
time, such other information as the Council may request;
shall recommend to the Council such measures relative to the affairs of the City, improvement of the government, and
promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient;
shall call special meetings of the Council as provided in section 2.23(b);
shall approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in section 2.20
may examine and audit all accounts of the City;
may require any department or agency of the City to submit written reports whenever he deems it expedient;
shall perform other duties as may be required by general State law, this charter or ordinance.
Section	2.20.	-	Submission	of	ordinances	to	the	mayor;	veto	power.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
11/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Every ordinance adopted by the Council shall be presented promptly by the Clerk to the Mayor.
The Mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the Clerk with or without his approval, or with
his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the Mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the Clerk; if the
ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at twelve o'clock noon on the tenth calendar day after its
adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the Mayor shall submit to the Council through the Clerk a written statement of his
reasons for his veto. The Clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the Mayor.
Ordinances vetoed by the Mayor shall be presented by the Clerk to the Council at its next meeting and should the Council then
or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of three members, it shall become law.
The Mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any
ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless
subsequently passed by the Council over the Mayor's veto as provided herein. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to
Council as though disapproved and shall become law unless overridden by Council as in subsection (c) above.
Section	2.21.	-	Mayor	pro	tem;	selection;	duties.
The Council shall elect by majority vote from among its members a Mayor Pro Tem who shall assume the duties and powers of the Mayor
upon the Mayor's disability or absence. The Council shall elect an acting Mayor Pro Tem from among its members for any period in which the
Mayor Pro Tem is disabled, absent or acting as Mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all members of the
Council.
Section	2.22.	-	Organization	meeting.
The Council shall meet for organization on the first scheduled meeting in January next following the City election. The meeting
shall be called to order by the City Clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows:
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of (Mayor or Councilman as the case may be) of this City and
that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United
States of America."
Following the induction of members, the Council by majority vote of all the members thereof shall elect one of their number to
be Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem shall serve for a term of one year and until his successor is elected and qualified.
Section	2.23.	-	Regular	and	special	meetings.
The Council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The Council may recess any
regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such
continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting.
Special meetings of the Council may be held on call of the Mayor or two members of the Council. Notice of such special
meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone, or shall be left at their residence in advance of the
meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the Mayor and all Councilmen are present when the special meeting is called.
Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such meeting and attendance at the meeting shall
constitute a waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special
meeting except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent, any business which may be transacted at a
regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting.
All meetings of the Council shall be public to the extent required by general State law and notice to the public of special
meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible forty-eight hours prior to such meetings.
Section	2.24.	-	Rules	of	procedure.
The Council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for
keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record.
Section	2.25.	-	Quorum,	voting.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
12/240
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Four Councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the Council. Voting on the adoption of
ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal but any member of the Council shall have the
right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the Council shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance,
resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. An abstention shall be considered a negative vote, a vote against or not in
favor of the adoption of an ordinance, resolution or motion unless the council member is legally disqualified from voting on the issue and is,
therefore, required by law to abstain.
(Ord. No. 2009-4, § 1, 11-10-2009)
Editor's note—
At the direction of the city, section 2.25, amended by Ord. No. 2009-4, § 1, adopted Nov. 10, 2009, has been codified in this charter.
Section	2.26.	-	Action	requiring	an	ordinance.
Except as herein provided, every official action of the Council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance or
resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not
expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be: "The Council of the City of Unadilla hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin.
Section	2.27.	-	Emergency	ordinances.
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the Council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances
but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or
authorize the borrowing of money except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner
prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting
clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted
with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced but the affirmative vote of a majority of the Council shall be
required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall
automatically stand repealed sixty days following the date upon which it was adopted but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance
in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing
ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances.
Section	2.28.	-	Codes	of	technical	regulations.
The Council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The
procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that:
the requirements of section 2.26(b) of this charter for assuring public access to the ordinance shall be construed to
include copies of any code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance; and
a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adoption ordinance, shall be authenticated and
recorded by the City Clerk pursuant to section 2.29 of this charter.
Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations may be made available by the City Clerk for distribution or for purchase at
a reasonable price.
Section	2.29.	-	Signing,	authenticating,	recording;	codifying,	printing.
The City Clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all
ordinances adopted by Council. Every ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor after adoption.
The Council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the City. The general codification
shall be adopted by the Council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto, with this
charter and any amendment thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the Council
may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Unadilla, Georgia". Copies of the
Code may be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the City and made available for purchase by the public at a
reasonable price as fixed by the Council.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
13/240
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
The Council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption. Follow
publication of the first Code of this City and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in su
the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The Council shall make such
arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes
technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code.
ARTICLE	III.	-	ADMINISTRATIVE	AFFAIRS
Section	3.10.	-	Administrative	and	service	departments.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the Council shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish or alter
all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the City, as necessary for the proper
administration of the affairs and government of this City.
Except as otherwise provided by this charter or general State law, department heads and other appointed officers of the City
shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications as shall be prescribed
by the governing authority.
All appointive officers and department heads shall receive such compensation as prescribed by Council.
There may be a supervisor of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each supervisor shall, subject to the
direction and supervision of the Mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his
department or agency.
All supervisors under the supervision of the Mayor shall be nominated by the Mayor with confirmation of appointment by the
Council. The Mayor may suspend or remove supervisors under his supervision. The supervisor involved may appeal to the
Council who, after a hearing, may override the Mayor's action by a vote of four Council members.
Section	3.11.	-	Board,	commissioners	and	authorities.
The Council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or
quasi-legislative function the Council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence,
duties and powers thereof.
All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the City shall be appointed by the Council for such terms of office and
in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of
appointment is prescribed by this charter or general State law.
The Council may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any
board, commission or authority.
Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the City shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed
herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or general State law.
No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the Clerk of the City
an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be administered by the
Mayor.
Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the
Council.
Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general State law, each board, commission or authority of the City shall
elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice chairman and may elect as its secretary one of its own
members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the City. Each board, commission or authority of the City government
may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the City or general State law,
as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed
with the Clerk of the City.
Section	3.12.	-	City	attorney.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
14/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
The Council may appoint a City attorney, together with such assistant City Attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the
payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the City. The City Attorney shall be responsible for representing and
defending the City in all litigation in which the City is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings
of the Council as directed; shall advise the Council, Mayor and other officers and employees of the City concerning legal aspects of the City's
affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as City Attorney.
Section	3.13.	-	City	clerk.
The Council may appoint a City Clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the City Council and to maintain in a safe place all records
and documents pertaining to the affairs of the City and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the Council may direct.
Section	3.14.	-	Tax	collector.
The Council may appoint a Tax Collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the City subject to the provisions
of this charter and the ordinances of the City, and the Tax Collector shall diligently comply with and endorce [sic] all general laws of the State
of Georgia relating to the collection, sale or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities.
Section	3.15.	-	City	accountant.
The Council may appoint a City Accountant to perform the duties of an accountant.
Section	3.16.	-	Consolidation	of	functions.
The Council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of City Clerk, City Tax Collector and City Accountant or any other positions
or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions.
Section	3.17.	-	Position	classication	and	pay	plans.
The Mayor may be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the Council for
approval upon request by the Council. Said plans may apply to all employees of the City and any of its agencies, departments, boards,
commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the Council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual
employees except by amendment of said pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed City officials are not City
employees.
Section	3.18.	-	Personnel	policies.
The Council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning:
the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; and
the administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings
thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; and
hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff
shall be effected; and
such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and
such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs.
ARTICLE	IV.	-	MUNICIPAL	COURT
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
15/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Editor's note— The text of the original act as set forth in 1977 Ga. Laws, page 3079 provided for the establishment of a recorder's court. In
accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(a), the term "recorder's court" has been changed to "municipal court" throughout the text of the Charter
and the Code of Ordinances.
Section	4.10.	-	Creation	of	municipal	court.
There is hereby established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try
offenses against the laws and ordinances of the City and to punish for a violation of the same.
Section	4.11.	-	Chief	judge,	associate	judge.
The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a Chief Judge and such part-time, full-time or stand-by Associate Judges as shall
be provided by ordinance.
No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a Judge of the Municipal Court unless he shall have attained the age of 21
years and be a resident of the same judicial circuit as the Municipal Court is located in. All Judges shall be appointed by
Council.
Compensation of the Judges shall be determined by a majority of the Council who may also remove for cause such Judge or
Judges by an affirmative vote of four members of the Council.
Before entering on duties of his office, each Judge shall take an oath given by the Mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully
discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor or partiality which shall be entered upon Council
minutes.
Section	4.12.	-	Convening.
The Municipal Court shall be convened at regular intervals as designated by Council or at such times as deemed necessary by the Judge
to keep current the dockets thereof.
Section	4.13.	-	Jurisdiction;	powers.
The Municipal Court shall try and punish for crimes against the City and for violation of its ordinances. The Municipal Court
shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed one
hundred dollars. The Municipal Court may fix punishment for offenses, within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of five
hundred dollars or imprisonment for sixty days, or both. As an alternative to fine or imprisonment, the Municipal Court may
sentence any offender upon conviction to labor in a City work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works
for a period not exceeding sixty days.
The Municipal Court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the costs of operation and shall be entitled to
reimbursement of the costs of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to Superior Courts for violations
of State law.
The Municipal Court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with
violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for
appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear
at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the Judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by
serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash
or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to
appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall on order of the Judge be forfeited to the City or the
property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner
and to the same extent as a lien for City property taxes.
The Municipal Court shall have authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause
that a State law has been violated.
The Municipal Court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession
of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary.
(2)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
16/240
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
The Municipal Court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summ
subpoenas and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by State law.
The Municipal Court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the City granted
by general State laws generally to mayor's, Municipal and police courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the
abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations.
Section	4.14.	-	Appeal.
A right of appeal to the Mayor and Council from the decision or judgment of the Municipal Court shall exist when the fine
imposed upon the defendant is greater than one hundred dollars or the punishment is for a longer time than thirty days'
imprisonment or thirty days of labor to the City. The right of said appeal must be exercised, in writing, to the Mayor and
Council, within five days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after the judgment of the Municipal Court. The failure to
exercise the right of appeal, as provided herein, shall not be construed as denying the right of appeal provided for in
subsection (b) hereof.
The right of appeal shall exist in all cases from the judgment of the Municipal Court to the Superior Court of Dooly County in
the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the Probate
Court; provided, however, that any person who fails to file his appeal to the Superior Court in either of the above cases within
thirty days of the date of his conviction in the Municipal Court shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the
Superior Court shall be a de novo proceeding.
Section	4.15.	-	Rules	for	court.
With the approval of the Council, the Judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and
proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the Municipal Court; provided, however, that the Council may adopt in part or
in toto the rules and regulations relative to the procedure of the operation of the Superior Court under the general laws of the State of
Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said Court may be filed with the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection
upon request.
ARTICLE	V.	-	ELECTIONS
Section	5.10.	-	Applicability	of	general	law.
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of
1933 (1968 Ga. Laws, page 885), as now or hereafter amended.
Section	5.11.	-	Election	of	council	and	mayor.
On the Tuesday following the second Sunday in December, 1977, and on said date biennially thereafter, there shall be an
election for the Mayor and three Councilmen. For the period beginning when the Mayor and three Councilmen elected as
provided herein take office and ending when the first three Councilmen elected under subsection (b) hereof take office, the
governing authority of the City of Unadilla shall be composed of the Mayor and three Councilmen elected as provided herein
and the three Councilmen (aldermen) elected under the former charter of the City of Unadilla whose regular terms of office
will expire at the time the first three Councilmen elected under subsection (b) hereof take office.
On the Tuesday following the second Sunday in December, 1978, and on said date biennially thereafter, the remaining three
Councilmen shall be elected to serve two-year terms. Thereafter, the Mayor and Councilmen shall be elected on the same date
in the order of expiration of terms of those so elected such that a continuing body is created.
The terms of office of the Mayor and Councilmen elected as provided in this section shall begin upon their taking the oath of
office as provided for in section 2.22 of this charter.
Section	5.12.	-	Special	elections;	vacancies.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
17/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
In the event that the office of Mayor or Council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the Council or those remaining
shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within twelve
months of the expiration of the term of that office, the Council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In
all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 341 of the
Code of Georgia of 1933 (1968 Ga. Laws, page 885), as now or hereafter amended.
Section	5.13.	-	Nonpartisan	elections.
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for City offices and all names of candidates for City offices shall be listed without party labels.
Section	5.14.	-	Other	provisions.
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate
to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 (1968 Ga. Laws, page
885), as now or hereafter amended.
Section	5.15.	-	Grounds	for	removal.
The Mayor, Council members, or others provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following
causes:
incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office;
conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law;
knowingly violate any express prohibition of this charter;
abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or
failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by law.
Section	5.16.	-	Procedure	for	removal.
Removal of an above described officer may be accomplished by one of the following methods:
By majority vote of the full Council after an investigative hearing, the officer to be removed not voting if he is a member
of the Council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the Council, such officer shall be
entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten
days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided
shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the Council to the Superior Court of Dooly County. Such appeal shall be
governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the Superior Court from the Probate Court.
By information filed in the Superior Court of Dooly County as provided by law.
ARTICLE	VI.	-	FINANCE
Section	6.10.	-	Property	tax.
The Council may assess, levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the City that is
subject to such taxation by the State and County. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the City
government; providing governmental services; for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations; and for any other public
purposes as determined by the Council in its discretion. The City is hereby exempted from the provisions of Georgia Code sections 92-4101
through 92-4104, inclusive.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
18/240
Section	6.11.	-	Millage	rate,	due	dates,	payment	methods.
The Council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the City property tax; a due date; and in what length of time these taxes must
be paid. The Council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as to authorize
the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of
revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal
the total amount approximated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the
general government of the City.
Section	6.12.	-	Occupation	and	business	taxes.
The Council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general State law. Such
taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in the City or who practice or offer to practice any profession
or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to the City to be so taxed. The Council may classify
businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of
such taxes as provided in this Article.
Section	6.13.	-	License,	permits,	fees.
The Council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this City or who
practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the City and pay a reasonable
fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general State law in such a way as to preclude City regulation.
Such fees may reflect the total cost to the City of regulating the activity and if unpaid shall be collected as provided in this Article for
delinquent taxes and fees. The Council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the
public health, safety and welfare necessitates.
Section	6.14.	-	Service	charges.
The Council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for sewer, sanitary, health services or any
other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the City for the total cost to the City of providing such services. If unpaid,
such charges shall be collected as provided in this Article for delinquent taxes and fees.
Section	6.15.	-	Special	assessments.
The Council shall have power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any
public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances, from the abutting property owners, under
such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent thirty days after their due
dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of ten percent, and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the
rate of seven percent per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens except
that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for County and City property taxes. Said lien shall also be enforceable by the same procedures and
under the same remedies as provided for in this Article for City property taxes.
Section	6.16.	-	Construction,	other	taxes.
The City shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by State law and the specific mention of any right, power or
authority in this Article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the City to govern its local affairs.
Section	6.17.	-	Collection	of	delinquent	taxes	and	fees.
The Council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue due the City by whatever
reasonable means as are not precluded by general State law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late
penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
19/240
(a)
persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking City licenses for failure to pay any City taxes or fees; allowing exceptions for
hardship; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions.
Section	6.18.	-	Transfer	of	executions.
The City Clerk shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi. fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer or other
assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of tax fi. fas. Such transfer
or assignment, when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title and interest as provided by Georgia law governing sales
and transfers of tax fi. fas.; provided, however, that upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fi. fa., whether assigned,
transferred or executed by the City, the owner of such property, in fee simple or lesser interest shall not lose his right to redeem the property
in accordance with the requirements of redemption of property sold under State or County ad valorem tax fi. fas. as said requirements now
exist or as may be hereinafter provided by law.
Section	6.19.	-	General	obligation	bonds.
The Council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture
authorized under this charter or the general laws of the State. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws
governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken.
Section	6.20.	-	Revenue	bonds.
Revenue bonds may be issued by the Council as provided by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 31, 1937,
known as the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as now or hereafter amended, or by any other Georgia law as now or hereafter
provided.
Section	6.21.	-	Short-term	notes.
The City must obtain and repay any short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year or as is otherwise provided by
present or future State law.
Section	6.22.	-	Fiscal	year.
The Council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting
and reporting of each and every office, department, agency and activity of the City government, unless otherwise provided by general State or
Federal law.
Section	6.23.	-	Preparation	of	budgets.
The Council may provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating
budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets
and programs.
Section	6.24.	-	Additional	appropriations.
The Council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or at any
special meeting called for such purpose. Any such additional appropriations, however, may be made only from an existing unappropriated
surplus in the fund to which it applies.
Section	6.25.	-	Capital	improvements	budget.
The Mayor may submit to the Council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of
financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The Council shall have power to accept with or without
amendments or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The Council shall not authorize an
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
20/240
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement unless the appropriations for such project
are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property
of the inhabitants, provided that such authorization is passed by two-thirds vote of the membership of the Council.
No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation
was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, provided, however, that the Mayor may submit amendments to the
capital improvements budget, accompanied by his recommendations thereon, at any time during the fiscal year. Any such
amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a vote of the Council.
Section	6.26.	-	Independent	audit.
There shall be an annual independent audit of all City accounts, funds and financial transactions by a Certified Public Accountant selected
by the Council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted governmental accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by
the State or Federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available
at printing cost to the public.
Section	6.27.	-	Contracting	procedures.
No contract with the City shall be binding on the City unless:
it is in writing;
it is made or authorized by the Council and such approval is entered in the Council minutes.
Section	6.28.	-	Centralized	purchasing.
The Council may, by ordinance, prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the City.
Section	6.29.	-	Sale	of	city	property.
The Council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City for governmental or other purposes
as provided by general State law, as now or later amended, by section 69-318 of the 1933 Code of Georgia (1976 Ga. Laws,
page 350).
The Council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the Mayor and
adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the
City has no readily ascertainable monetary value.
Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the City, a small parcel or tract of land
is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the City, the Council may authorize the
Mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the City a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an
abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in
settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances
heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the City has in such property,
notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made.
ARTICLE	VII.	-	GENERAL	PROVISIONS
Section	7.10.	-	Eminent	domain.
The Council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets,
market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals
and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities and
any other public improvements inside or outside the City, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken
under Chapter 36-202 of the Georgia Code, subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other Georgia law applicable now or
provided in the future.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
21/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Section	7.11.	-	Franchises.
The Council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the City's streets and alleys, for the purpose of railroads, street
railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar
organizations. The Council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the
consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of twenty-five years and no
franchise shall be granted unless the City receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The Council shall provide for the registration of
all franchises with the City Clerk in a registration book to be kept by him. The Council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a
reasonable time of all franchises previously granted.
Section	7.12.	-	Ocial	bonds.
The officers and employees of the City, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such
terms and conditions as the Council may from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by State Law.
Section	7.13.	-	Existing	ordinances,	resolutions,	rules	and	regulations.
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City not in conflict with this charter shall continue in force unless repealed
or amended by Council.
Section	7.14.	-	Existing	personnel	and	ocers.
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the City and their rights, privileges and powers shall
continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of sixty days before or during which the existing Council shall pass a transition
ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges and
powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition.
Section	7.15.	-	Pending	matters.
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative
proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such City agencies, personnel or offices as may be
provided by the Council.
Section	7.16.	-	Penalties.
The violation of any provisions of this charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty days or both
such fine and imprisonment.
Section	7.17.	-	Construction.
Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof.
The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is not.
The word "City" shall mean the City of Unadilla, Georgia and its governing authority.
The word "Council" shall mean the City Council of this City.
The singular shall include the plural and the masculine the feminine and vice versa.
Section	7.18.	-	Severability.
If any Article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof of this charter, shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly
and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
22/240
Article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other.
Section	7.19.	-	Specic	act	repealed.
An Act incorporating the City of Unadilla in the County of Dooly, approved August 10, 1920 (1920 Ga. Laws, page 1705), is hereby repealed
in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety.
Section	7.20.	-	Eective	dates.
For the purpose of holding the elections provided for in section 5.11 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the
Governor or upon its otherwise becoming law without his approval. For all other purposes, this Act shall become effective when the Mayor
and Councilmen elected under subsection (a) of section 5.11 of this Act take their oaths of office.
Section	7.21.	-	Repealer.
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.
Subpart	B
RELATED	LAWS
ARTICLE	I.	-	ARENA	AND	TOURISM	AUTHORITY
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1989 Ga. Laws, page 4434 which created the Unadilla Arena and Tourism Authority. Amendments to the
act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision
remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform
system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Section	1.	-	Declaration	of	need.
It is declared that there exists in Unadilla, Georgia, a need for an authority to function without profit in developing and promoting
tourism for the public good in this state and for the cultural growth, public welfare, education, and recreation of the people of Unadilla,
Georgia, and of this state.
Section	2.	-	Creation	of	authority.
There is created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the Unadilla Arena and Tourism Authority, which shall be deemed a
political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name.
Section	3.	-	Purpose.
The purpose of the authority and any funds realized by said authority shall be expended for the development and promotion in Unadilla,
Georgia, and in this state of public projects for the cultural growth, public welfare, education, and recreation of the people of Unadilla,
Georgia, and of this state, including the acquisition and construction of a building or buildings and related facilities, which shall be declared to
be public buildings, to be used for amusement, recreational, civic, cultural, or educational purposes or a combination thereof, including fairs,
livestock shows, athletic contests, games, agricultural events, expositions, exhibitions, conventions, public meetings or gatherings, concerts,
theater; and for such other activities as are designed and intended to promote tourism; and for the purchase of lands, easements, rights in
land, and franchises for the construction of such facility or facilities and for use in connection therewith.
Section	4.	-	Members.
(3)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
23/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
The authority shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be the current mayor of the City of Unadilla, or his designee, an
whom shall be appointed by the city council of the City of Unadilla immediately upon the effective date of this Act. The initial mem
be appointed for the following terms:
Mayor of the City of Unadilla, or his designee, for a term to coincide with the mayor's term of office;
Two members for a one-year term;
Two members for a three-year term;
Two members for a four-year term.
Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of four years, except that the appointment of any person selected to fill any
unexpired term at any time shall be only for the remainder of such term. Each member shall hold office until his successor has
been appointed and qualified and shall be eligible to succeed himself.
The members of the authority shall organize and enter upon the performance of their duties immediately after the effective
date of this Act. The authority shall elect one of its members as chairman and one as vice chairman and shall elect a secretary
and a treasurer, or a secretary-treasurer, who may but need not necessarily hold membership on the authority. Such officers
shall serve for such terms as shall be prescribed by the rules of the authority or until their successors are elected and
qualified.
Four members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, and no vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum
to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority at every meeting, but in every instance the affirmative vote
of at least four members of the authority shall be required to authorize any legal act of the authority, including all things
necessary to authorize and issue revenue bonds.
The members of the authority shall not be entitled to compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed by the authority
for their actual expenses properly incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations
for its own government and may employ professional and technical supervisors, assistants, and experts and any other agents
and employees, temporary or permanent, as it may require. The members of the authority shall be accountable in all respects
as trustees, and the authority shall keep suitable books and records of all its obligations, contracts, transactions, and
undertakings and of all income and receipts of every nature and of all expenditures of every kind.
Section	5.	-	Public	property.
It is found, determined, and declared that the creation of the authority and the carrying out of its corporate purposes is in all respects for
the benefit of the people of Unadilla, Georgia, and of this state, and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity, and all
property of said authority is declared and shall in all respects be considered to be public property and title to such property shall be held by
the authority only for the benefit of the public, and the use of such property pursuant to the terms of this Act shall be and is declared to be
for public and governmental purposes. The authority is granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities
and counties for the operation of public facilities.
Section	6.	-	Powers.
The authority shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Act,
including, but not limited to, the following powers:
To adopt and alter a corporate seal;
To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real
property or rights of easements therein or franchises and personal property necessary or convenient for its corporate
purposes and to use, lease, and dispose of real and personal property in any manner it deems to be to the best
advantage of the authority and the purposes thereof. Title to such property, however, shall be held by the authority only
for the benefit of the public;
To accept, receive, and administer gifts, grants, loans, appropriations, and donations of money, materials, and property of
any kind, including loans and grants from the United States or the State of Georgia or any agency, department, authority,
or instrumentality of either upon such terms and condition as the United States, the State of Georgia, or such agency,
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
24/240
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
department, authority, of instrumentality shall impose, and to administer trusts, and to sell, lease, transfer, convey,
appropriate, pledge, mortgage, or encumber all of its property and assets;
To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue notes or revenue bonds payable from the earnings of
the projects of the authority; to execute trust agreements or indentures; and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge,
encumber, and assign any and all of its funds, assets, property, and income as security for the payment of such notes or
revenue bonds and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the owners thereof; and to provide for
foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default either in payment of principal or of conditions
pursuant to which such obligations were issued;
To contract with the State of Georgia and the agencies, instrumentalities, departments, and political subdivisions thereof
and with private persons and corporations in such manner as the legitimate and necessary purposes of this Act shall
authorize or require including contracts for construction and leasing, as lessor or as lessee, of projects which it causes to
be erected or acquired;
To construct, reconstruct, acquire, equip, own, alter, repair, maintain, add to, extend, improve, operate, and manage
public projects, including the erection or acquisition, in Unadilla, Georgia, of a building or buildings, which shall be and
are declared to be public buildings, to be used for amusement, recreational, civic, cultural, or educational purposes or a
combination thereof, including fairs, livestock shows, athletic contests, games, agricultural events, expositions, concerts,
theater, and such other activities as are designed and intended to promote tourism; and to purchase lands, easements,
right in lands, and franchises for the construction of such facility or facilities and for use in connection therewith, the cost
of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of the sale of revenue bonds of the authority, and
the title to such property to be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public;
To issue revenue bonds as authorized, defined, and provided for in this Act and in O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as
the "Revenue Bond Law," in order to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction,
improvement, equipment, addition to, or extension of any such project; which bonds may be issued in coupon or
registered form, or both, as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon
bond as to the principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest;
To issue revenue bonds to call, refund, or refinance in whole or in part all outstanding revenue bonds secured by the
anticipated revenue of such project and to include in the amount of such refunding bonds all interest and any call
premium that may be required for the redemption and refunding of such outstanding bonds;
To do any and all things necessary or proper for the accomplishment of the objectives of this Act and any amendments
hereto and to exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in
conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and
To invest any accumulation of its funds and any sinking fund or reserves in any manner that public funds of the State of
Georgia or its political subdivisions may be invested and to purchase its own bonds at a price of not more than the call
price thereof and accrued interest, but bonds so purchased shall be canceled and shall not be reissued.
Section	7.	-	Powers	under	"Revenue	Bond	Law."
In addition to the foregoing powers and subject to any limitations herein contained, the authority shall have all the powers of
municipalities under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and shall have the power to expend
such sums as may be necessary for the survey, study, financing, construction, and completion of any such project and the placing of the same
in operation.
Section	8.	-	Credit	of	state	not	pledged.
Revenue bonds issued under provisions of this Act shall not constitute a debt or a pledge of the faith and credit of Unadilla, Georgia, but
such bonds shall be payable solely from the rentals, revenues, and funds of the authority as provided in the resolutions or trust agreements
or indentures authorizing or securing the issuance and payment of such bonds, and the issuance of such bonds shall not obligate the county
to levy or pledge any form of taxation whatsoever for the payment thereof or to make any appropriation for their payment, and such bonds
shall contain on their face a recital setting forth substantially the foregoing provisions of this Act.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
25/240
(a)
(1)
Section	9.	-	Legal	investments.
The bonds herein authorized are made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this state and all political subdivisions, all
insurance companies and associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings
banks and savings associations, including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies and other
persons carrying on a banking business, all administrators, guardians, executors, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons
whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest
funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also made securities which may be deposited with and shall be
received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all political subdivisions thereof for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds
or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized.
Section	10.	-	Contracts	for	use	of	projects.
The authority may contract with any political subdivision or political subdivisions of this state for the payment of rents, fees, and charges
for the use by the political subdivisions or the residents thereof of the project or projects and facilities of the authority or by the authority for
the use of any public property of the political subdivision. The rentals contracted to be paid by the lessees or tenants to the authority under
the contract entered into pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall constitute general obligations of the political subdivision, and the full
faith and credit of the political subdivision may be pledged to provide the funds required to fulfill all obligations arising under any such
contract. Any political subdivision which shall have entered into a contract pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall annually in each and
every fiscal year during the term of the contract include in the general revenue or appropriation measure sums sufficient to satisfy the
payments required to be made in each year by such contract until all payments required under such contract have been paid in full. In the
event that for any reason any such provision or appropriation is not made then the fiscal officers of such political subdivision are authorized
and directed to set up as an appropriation on their accounts in each fiscal year the amounts required to pay the obligations of such contract
as authorized and required, which amounts shall be due and payable and shall be expended for the purpose of paying and meeting the
obligations provided under the terms and conditions of such contract, and such appropriation shall have the same legal status as if the
contracting political subdivision had included the amount of the appropriation in its general revenue or appropriation measure. The fiscal
officers of the political subdivision shall make such payment to the authority if for any reason such appropriation is not otherwise made, and
any such political subdivision may obligate itself and its successors to use only such structure, building, or facilities constituting such project
and none other.
Section	11.	-	Revenue	bonds.
The authority shall have power and is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds of the authority for the
purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any one or a combination of its projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds
shall be payable from and may be secured by a pledge of rents, fees, charges, and other revenues of, and by the mortgage of all or any part
of the project or projects financed in whole or in part with the proceeds of such bonds or with the proceeds of bonds called and refunded or
to be called and refunded by such issue. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall mature, and shall be payable as to both principal and
interest as may be determined by the authority within the terms of O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," except as
to any limitation as to interest which may be contained therein, and the bonds may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the
authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the
issuance of the bonds. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are
issued, the surplus shall be deposited as may be directed in the resolution or trust instrument providing for the issuance of such bonds.
Section	12.	-	Rental	revenue.
For the purpose of earning sufficient revenue to make possible the financing of the construction of the project or projects of
the authority with revenue bonds, the cost of which shall include all elements of cost authorized by said "Revenue Bond Law,"
the authority is authorized and empowered to fix, revise, and collect rents, fees, and charges on each project which it shall
cause to be acquired or constructed. Such rentals, fees, or charges to be paid for the use of such project or projects shall be so
fixed and adjusted as to provide a fund sufficient with other revenue, if any, of such project or projects or of said authority:
To pay the cost of operating, maintaining, and repairing the project or projects, including reserves for insurance and
extraordinary repairs and other reserves required by the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to such
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
26/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
bonds and the issuance thereof, unless such cost shall be otherwise provided for;
To pay the principal and interest on such revenue bonds as the same shall become due, including premiums, if any, the
proceeds of which shall have been or will be used to pay the cost of such project or projects, including all elements of
cost authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as the "Revenue Bond Law";
To comply with any sinking fund requirements contained in the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to
the issuance of and security for such bonds;
To perform fully all provisions of such resolution or trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of or security
for such bonds to the payment of which such rental is pledged;
To accumulate any excess income which may be required by the purchasers of such bonds or which may be dictated by
the requirements of such resolution or trust agreement or indenture or by the need to achieve ready marketability of and
low interest rates on such bonds; and
To pay any expenses in connection with such bond issue or such project or projects including but not limited to trustees,
counsel, and fiscal fees.
The rentals shall be payable at such intervals as may be agreed upon and set forth in the rental contract or lease providing
therefor and any such contract or lease may provide for the commencement of rental payments to the authority prior to the
completion of the undertaking by the authority of any such project, and the rental contract may provide for the payment of
rental charges during such times as the project or projects may be partially or wholly untenantable.
The rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to operate, maintain, and keep in good repair, including
complete reconstruction, if necessary, the rented or leased premises and projects, regardless of the cause of the necessity of
such maintenance, repair, or reconstruction.
Such rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to indemnify and save harmless the authority from any and
all damage to persons and property occurring on or by reason of the leased property or improvements thereon and to
undertake, at the expense of the tenants or lessees, the defense of any action brought against the authority by reason of
injury or damages to persons or property occurring on or by reason of the leased premises.
In the event of any failure or refusal on the part of the tenants or lessees to perform punctually any covenant or obligation
contained in any such rental contract or lease, the authority may enforce performance by any legal or equitable process
against the tenants or lessees, and consent may be given for the institution of any such action.
The authority shall be permitted to assign any rental payments due or to become due to the authority, pursuant to any such
rental contract or lease, to a trustee or paying agent as may be required by the terms of the resolution or trust agreement or
indenture relating to the issuance of and security for such bonds.
The use and disposition of the authority's revenue shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance
of such bonds or of the trust agreement or indenture, if any, securing the same.
Section	13.	-	Sinking	fund.
The revenues, rents, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects and any and all revenues, rents, and earnings received
by the authority, regardless of whether or not such revenues, rents, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which bonds were
issued, may be pledged by the authority to the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as may be
provided in any resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received may include
funds received from one or more or all sources and may be set aside at regular intervals into a sinking fund for which provision may be made
in any such resolution or trust instrument, which sinking fund may be pledged to and charged with the payment of:
The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall become due;
The principal of the bonds as the same shall mature;
The necessary charges of any trustee or paying agent or registrar for such bonds; and
Any premium upon bonds retired upon call or purchase.
The use and disposition of any sinking fund may be subject to such regulations as may be provided for in the resolution
authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument securing the payment of the same. Except as may otherwise be
provided in the resolution or trust instrument, the sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
27/240
revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution or the trust
instrument, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds
so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not be reissued, printed, or delivered.
Section	14.	-	Form	of	bonds.
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the
denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank
or trust company inside or outside the State of Georgia.
Section	15.	-	Trust	agreement.
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of revenue bonds may be secured by a trust agreement or indenture made by the authority
with a corporate trustee which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside the State of
Georgia. Such trust agreement or indenture may pledge or assign rents, fees, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority
and any proceeds which may be derived from the disposition of any real or personal property of the authority or the proceeds of insurance
carried thereon. The resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds and such trust agreement or indenture may contain provisions
for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bond owners, including the right of foreclosure of any mortgage or encumbrance
and the right of appointment of a receiver upon default in the payment of any principal or interest obligation and the rights of any receiver or
trustee to enforce collection of any rents, fees, charges, or revenues for the use of the project necessary to pay all costs of operation and all
reserves provided for, the principal of and interest on all bonds in the issue, all costs of collection, and all other costs reasonably necessary to
accomplish the collection of such sums in the event of any default of the authority. Such resolution or trust agreement or indenture may
include covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property for and construction of the project and to
the custody, safeguarding, and application of all funds of the authority, including any proceeds derived from the disposition of any real or
personal property of the authority or the proceeds of insurance carried thereon; and covenants providing for the operation, maintenance,
repair, and insurance of the project may contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional bonds may be issued.
Such resolution or trust agreement or indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bond owners and of the trustee and may
restrict the individual right of action of any bond owner as is customary in securing bonds and debentures of corporations and may contain
such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bond owners. All expenses incurred in
carrying out such trust may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such trust.
Section	16.	-	Venue	of	actions;	jurisdiction.
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act brought in the courts of the State of Georgia, shall be brought
in the Superior Court of Dooly County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of the bonds issued under the provisions of this Act
shall be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such action.
Section	17.	-	Validation	of	bonds.
All bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in the Superior Court of Dooly County in accordance with the procedure of
O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall be brought against said authority and, in the
event the payments to be made by any political subdivision under a contract entered into between the authority and such political
subdivision are pledge as security for the payment of the bonds sought to be validated, such political subdivision shall also be required to
show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be adjudicated to be in all respects
valid and binding upon such defendants. It shall be incumbent upon such defendants to defend against adjudication of the validity and
binding effect of such contract or contracts or be forever bound thereby. Notice of such proceedings shall be included in the notice of
validation hearing required to be issued and published by the Clerk of the Superior Court of Dooly County, in which court such validation
proceeding shall be initiated. Any citizen of the State of Georgia may intervene in the validation proceeding in accordance with the procedure
prescribed in said "Revenue Bond Law," and appeal from the judgment in said proceeding may be taken in accordance with the appellate
procedure prescribed in said law. In the event no such appeal is filed within the time prescribed by law or, if filed, the judgment of the
Superior Court of Dooly County so confirming and validating the validity and binding effect of such contract or contracts and of such bonds
and the security therefor shall be forever conclusive.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
28/240
Section	18.	-	Irrevocable	contract.
The authority shall have perpetual existence; and, while any of the bonds issued by the authority shall remain outstanding, the powers,
duties, or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished, impaired, or affected in any manner
which will affect adversely the interests and rights of the owners of such bonds, and no other authority, instrumentality, or body will be
created or empowered to complete with the authority so as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the owners of such bonds. The
provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the state, the authority, and every owner of the authority's bonds and, upon and after the
issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act, shall constitute an irrevocable contract with the owners of such bonds.
Section	19.	-	Trust	funds.
All funds received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds or as revenues, rents, fees,
charges, or other earnings or as gifts, grants, or other contributions shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as
provided in this Act, and bond owners entitled to receive the benefits of such funds shall have a lien on all such funds until applied as
provided for in any such resolution, trust agreement, or indenture of the authority.
Section	20.	-	Construction.
This Act, being for the welfare of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof.
Section	21.	-	Powers	declared	supplementary.
The provisions of this Act shall be regarded as supplementary and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be
regarded as being in derogation of any powers now existing. The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as the "Revenue Bond Law,"
which are not in conflict herewith shall be applicable hereto and to the bonds issued hereunder and to any resolution or trust instrument
adopted and entered into in order to provide for the payment of such bonds and the interest thereon. All bonds issued hereunder shall be
signed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-17-1, relating to use of facsimile signatures on public securities.
Section	22.	-	Severability.
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full
force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not
originally a part hereof. The General Assembly declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such
part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section	23.	-	Eective	date.
This Act shall be effective immediately upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval.
Section	24.	-	Repealer.
All laws and parts of law in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.
CHARTER	AND	RELATED	LAWS	COMPARATIVE	TABLE	GEORGIA	LAWS
This table shows the location of the Georgia laws in the basic Charter and any amendments thereto.
Year Page  Section	this
Charter/
Related	Laws
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
29/240
1977 3079 Char.	Arts.	I—VII
1989 4027 Char	§	1.11
4434 Char	§	1.11
RL	§§	1—24
Ordinance
Number
Date Section  Section
this	Charter
2009-4 11-10-2009 1 §	2.25
PART	II	-	CODE	OF	ORDINANCES
Chapter	1	-	GENERAL	PROVISIONS
Sec.	1-1.	-	Designation	and	citation	of	Code.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the city of Unadilla,
Georgia," and may be so cited.
Sec.	1-2.	-	Denitions	and	rules	of	construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council:
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the
obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby.
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Unadilla, Georgia.
City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Unadilla, Georgia.
Code. The term "Code" shall mean The Code of the City of Unadilla, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of
time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or
the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday,
the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the
last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall
have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the city.
County. Whenever the terms "county," "the county" and "this county" are used, they shall refer to Dooly County, Georgia.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
30/240
Court. The term "court" shall mean the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances
of the city, whether such court shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform
some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise.
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes
greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise
declared.
Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" shall mean the legislative authority of the government of the city composed of a mayor
and six councilmembers as provided in Charter section 2.10.
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" shall mean calendar month and calendar year, unless otherwise provided.
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of The City of
Unadilla" were added thereto.
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a
particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference
to such subject matter.
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded.
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation.
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it.
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, and bodies
politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons.
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a
different significance.
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the
city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time
by the mayor and council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review
during normal business hours.
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons.
State. Whenever the terms "state," "the state" and "this state" are used, they shall refer to the State of Georgia.
Street. The term "street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the
city, unless otherwise provided.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
31/240
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the
part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless
expressly so provided.
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future.
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs.
State law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3); construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. §1-3-2; general statutory
definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; computation of time under Civil Practice Act and court rules, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6.
Sec.	1-3.	-	Catchlines	of	sections;	history	notes	and	other	references.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the
Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect.
State law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7.
Sec.	1-4.	-	Eect	of	repeal	of	ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit,
prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance
repealed.
Sec.	1-5.	-	Severability	of	parts	of	Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability
shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
State law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1;
construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6.
Sec.	1-6.	-	Amendments	to	Code;	eect	of	new	ordinances;	amendatory	language.
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of
chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded
from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or
omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the mayor and council.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the
section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of the City of Unadilla, Georgia, is
hereby amended to read as follows: …" The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of the
City of Unadilla, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________,
which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows: …" The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out
in full as desired.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
32/240
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, art
chapter number, as the case may be.
Sec.	1-7.	-	Altering	Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete
pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12.
State law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1.
Sec.	1-8.	-	Supplementation	of	Code.
By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code
shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that
they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete,
and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the
adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by
the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may
make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is
necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the
supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as
the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the
Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code).
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the
Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the
supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec.	1-9.	-	Liability	for	violations	by	corporations,	other	associations.
Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated
association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be
a violation by such corporation, association or organization.
Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization
shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the
violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or
order, of any such person.
Sec.	1-10.	-	Provisions	considered	continuations	of	existing	ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code,
shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec.	1-11.	-	Ordinances	not	aected	by	Code.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
33/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:
Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date of this Code.
Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of
any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness.
Any contract or obligation assumed by the city.
Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee.
Any right or franchise granted by the city.
Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public
way in the city.
Any appropriation ordinance.
Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term.
Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements.
Any zoning ordinance.
Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat.
Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city.
The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code.
Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this section.
Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city.
Any ordinance adopting an emergency management plan.
Any ordinance adopting a comprehensive plan and shortterm work update.
Any ordinance adopting a comprehensive solid waste management plan and shortterm work update.
Any ordinance providing for a schedule of speed zones.
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance
which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the
same extent as if set out at length in this section.
Sec.	1-12.	-	General	penalty.
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or
whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, unless otherwise
provided by state law, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, and by imprisonment in the city or county jail not to exceed six months, and to work on the
city streets and public works not exceeding 90 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed therefor
may be collected by execution. Each day any such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense.
State law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for
offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases
to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail
construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; alternative punishments for traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); display of driver's license for
violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; confinement as penalty for violation of municipal ordinances,
O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; authorization of municipal courts to impose any punishment up to the maximum specified by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-
32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers of municipalities with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2);
jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit
fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
34/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Chapter	2	-	ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any administrative ordinances or
resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); law enforcement, ch. 38;
taxation, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 66; administration, enforcement, and amendment procedures, app. A, art. IX.
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Sec.	2-1.	-	Polling	place	location.
The location of the polling place for all elections held in the city shall be the Unadilla City Hall, 1616 Borum Street, Unadilla, Georgia,
31092
Sec.	2-2.	-	Election	superintendent.
The city clerk shall act for the mayor and council as election superintendent and shall provide necessary ballots, tally sheets, and all other
necessary materials for use by the poll officials in holding any and all elections, held from time to time in the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-4)
Sec.	2-3.	-	Worker's	compensation.
The city clerk is authorized to obtain worker's compensation insurance for all municipal employees including volunteer firemen.
(Prior Code, § 10-21)
Sec.	2-4.	-	[Records	retention	schedules.]
Those local government records retention schedules as promulgated by the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of
Georgia, as amended from time to time, and found on the following website:
http:/sos.georgia.gov.archives/pdf/state_spec_reports/LocalGovernmentSchedule2009.pdf
are hereby approved and adopted as records retention schedules for the City of Unadilla.
The city clerk is responsible for records management activities and is charged with the responsibility for directing and
coordinating all records management matters.
No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules.
Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city clerk which shall
show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed.
(Ord. No. 11-2, §§ 1—4, 3-8-2011)
Editor's note—
Sections 1—4 of Ord. No. 11-2, adopted March 8, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-4 was at the discretion
of the editor.
Secs.	2-5—2-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	MAYOR	AND	COUNCIL
DIVISION	1.	-	GENERALLY
(4)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
35/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
Sec.	2-31.	-	Procedure	for	adoption	of	ordinances,	resolutions	and	contracts.
All ordinances, resolutions and contracts of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the following manner:
Preparation. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the
council, or requested in writing by the mayor, or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative.
Administrative staff approval. All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the
council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his authorized representative, and shall have
been examined and approved for administration by the mayor or his authorized representative where there are
substantive matters of administration involved. All such instruments shall have first been referred to the head of the
department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution or contract
document would devolve and be approved by said department head; provided, however, that if approval is not given,
then the same shall be returned to the mayor with a written memorandum of the reasons why such approval is withheld.
In the event the questioned instrument is not redrafted to meet a department head objection, or objection is not
withdrawn and approval in writing given, then the mayor shall so advise the council and give the reasons advanced by the
department head for withholding approval.
Introduction and adoption.
Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and
sponsored by a member of the council except that the mayor or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions
and other matters or subjects to the council, and any councilman may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that
such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted.
No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced.
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and no ordinance, or
section thereof, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or
section amended or repealed, and when practicable all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to the Code.
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a
majority of the whole council.
(Prior Code, § 2-16)
Charter reference— Voting on adoption of ordinances, § 2.25; action requiring an ordinance, § 2.26; emergency ordinances, § 2.27.
Secs.	2-32—2-50.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	2.	-	MEETINGS
Sec.	2-51.	-	When	mayor	and	council	meetings	held.
The mayor and council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m., unless otherwise
ordered by the mayor and council; provided, that the mayor may convene the council whenever in his opinion the public business requires it,
and he shall do so upon the application by a majority of the members of the mayor and council. All meetings at which official actions are to
be taken shall be open to the public.
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 7-24-2003)
Charter reference— Organization meeting, § 2.22; regular and special meetings, § 2.23.
Sec.	2-52.	-	Agenda.
There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each meeting of the mayor and council. Persons who desire to address the mayor and
council at a meeting shall notify the city clerk by the close of business on the Thursday preceding the next meeting. The mayor retains the
discretion to allow a person not otherwise on the agenda to address the mayor and council.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
36/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Sec.	2-53.	-	Rules	for	the	conduct	of	business.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, Roberts' Rules of Order shall generally govern the conduct of council meetings.
Call to order. The mayor, or in his absence the mayor pro tem, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for regular,
adjourned, special, or called meetings; and shall immediately call the council to order.
Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk shall call the roll of the members, and the
names of those present shall be entered in the minutes.
Quorum. A majority of all the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting
of the council.
Order of business. The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order:
Call to order by presiding officer.
Roll call.
Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
Petitions and communications.
Reports of standing committees.
Reports of special committees.
Unfinished business.
New business.
Adjournment.
Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a council member, such
minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member a copy thereof.
Reports by committees. Any business coming before the mayor and council, concerning the subject matter of which any
standing or special committee has jurisdiction, may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It
shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor and council or any member of
the council, to examine any matter referred to such committee and to make a report thereof at the next regular meeting
of the mayor and council or to show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so
directed by the presiding officer.
Manner of addressing council. No member, while the mayor and council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless
recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt another while
speaking, except to call him to order for explanation.
Limitations on addressing mayor and council. Any person not a member of the council who desires to address the council
shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do, and then shall stand up before the mayor and council,
give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the council as a body
rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to five minutes unless additional time is granted by the
council.
(Prior Code, § 2-4)
Sec.	2-54.	-	Recording	vote.
Whenever any council member shall request it, the yeas and nays of the members present shall be recorded on the minutes on any
question taken.
(Prior Code, § 2-17)
Sec.	2-55.	-	Questions	of	order.
The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any member of council who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to
the mayor and council in the manner provided by Roberts' Rules of Order for appealing from decisions of presiding officers.
(Prior Code, § 2-18)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
37/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Secs.	2-56—2-80.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	OFFICERS	AND	EMPLOYEES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— The city compiles and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in its manual of personnel policies and
procedures. In addition, sundry ordinances and resolutions have been adopted to provide for employee benefits through the Georgia
Municipal Employees Benefit System, a retirement program administered pursuant to section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, and the
Georgia Municipal Association Deferred Compensation Program. Official copies of all documentation are on file in the office of the city clerk.
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); chief of police—
Appointment; duties, § 38-1.
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; employment
of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; civil
service system for county employees authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21(a); personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers for
official acts, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal
officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2).; authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-
2(4); authority to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; Fair
Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of
employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee
Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. §
45-23-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public
Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.;
reserved; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14).
Sec.	2-81.	-	Duties	of	city	clerk.
The city clerk under the direction of the mayor and the assistant to the mayor will supervise the operation of the city office and in his
capacity as municipal clerk have the following duties:
Attend all meetings of the mayor and council and keep correct and full minutes of mayor and council proceedings
together with all ordinances or resolutions passed by the mayor and council.
Insert all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part of
the city's Code of Ordinances when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form.
Extract from said Code of Ordinances all provisions which, from time to time, may be repealed by the mayor and council.
Receive all applications or petitions made to the city and place them before the mayor and council at the meeting of the
mayor and council next succeeding the receipt thereof.
Carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index of all such records and
documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
Issue all licenses and permits authorized by the mayor and council and keep an accurate record thereof.
Maintain a proper registration book of all persons qualified to vote in any municipal election of the city.
Receive signed and dated receipts of purchases for items of $50.00 or less and approve payment for the same. All
purchase requests in excess of $50.00 shall be signed and dated by the department head prior to being approved by the
mayor and council.
Keep a current book of accounts showing all money received on behalf of the city and the source and disposition thereof
and furnish the council with quarterly statements detailing all receipts and payments of funds at the end of each quarter
of the fiscal year.
Establish and maintain accurate personnel records of all municipal employees detailing accumulation and use of leave
(5)
(5)
(5)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
38/240
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
time, commendations, or disciplinary actions received.
Perform all other duties relative to maintaining the city office or as from time to time requested by the mayor and
council.
(Prior Code, § 10-2)
Sec.	2-82.	-	Duties	of	department	heads.
Each department head shall perform all duties required of his office by state and federal laws, the city Charter, and this Code, and such
other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the mayor and council and shall also:
Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the mayor and
council, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the city and general public.
Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information
necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for periodic reports as may be requested by
the mayor and council.
Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments.
Establish and maintain accurate personnel records for employees under his general supervision and forward notice of
employees taking leave time to the city clerk two days prior to each pay period.
Be immediately responsible to the mayor and council for the effective administration of their respective departments and
all activities assigned thereto.
(Prior Code, § 10-3)
Sec.	2-83.	-	Employment	limitation.
No employee of the city shall serve as mayor or council member unless he shall first have resigned from such position with the city, and
no member of the mayor and council shall be employed by said city while acting in their official capacity as mayor or council member.
(Prior Code, § 10-5)
Secs.	2-84—2-110.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	IV.	-	AUTHORITIES,	BOARDS,	COMMISSIONS,	COMMITTEES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Municipal planning commission, app. A, art. X.
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3.
DIVISION	1.	-	GENERALLY
Secs.	2-111—2-130.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	2.	-	CLEAN	COMMUNITY	COMMISSION
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee
and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3.
Sec.	2-131.	-	Established.
(6)
(6)
(7)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
39/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
There is hereby established the City of Unadilla Clean Community Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-39)
Sec.	2-132.	-	Duties.
The duties of the clean community commission shall be to promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of the
city; to initiate, plan, direct, and coordinate programs for litter control in conjunction with and in cooperation with citizens, government,
businesses, and industries within the city limits of the city on a sustainable basis; to implement and maintain a clean community system; and
to study, investigate, and develop plans for improving health, sanitation, safety, and cleanliness of the city by beautifying the streets,
highways, alleys, stream banks, lots, yards, and other similar places on both public and private property in said city; to aid in the prevention of
fire, disease, and other casualties by the removal and elimination of trash and other debris from the streets, highways, alleys, lots, yards, and
other similar places; to encourage the placing, planting, and/or preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubs, and other objects of
ornamentation in said city; to protect song birds and other wild fowl; to advise and recommend plans to departments of the city for the
beautification of the city; and otherwise to promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of the city. Provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other commissions, departments, boards, and
like agencies of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-40)
Sec.	2-133.	-	Authority.
In order to perform the foregoing duties the clean community commission shall have the following authority:
To adopt bylaws to facilitate the attainment of its purpose and functions;
To initiate, plan, direct and coordinate community wide efforts to achieve its goals;
To solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property, and facilities for expenditure
and use by the clean community commission for the accomplishment of its objects;
To employ, to pay, and to terminate the employment of such staff as may be required for the fulfillment of clean
community commission purposes; and
To make recommendations to the mayor and council as well as to the private sector regarding measures which it deems
necessary to accomplish its objects.
(Prior Code, § 2-41)
Sec.	2-134.	-	Membership.
Generally. The clean community commission shall consist of seven regular members. The mayor and council members will
each appoint one regular member of the clean community commission and there will always be one regular commission
member representing the mayor and each of the six members of council. The term of service of each member of the clean
community commission will be the same as the term of the council member or mayor who appointed him, with a new
appointment to be made when there is a new mayor or councilperson elected, or at the beginning of a new term of a mayor or
councilperson. Appointments of all members of the clean community commission shall be made within 30 days of the date the
councilperson or mayor takes office, except that initial appointments shall be made within 30 days from the date this
enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived.
Ex officio member. In addition to the seven regular members, there shall be one ex officio member of the clean community
commission who shall be the president of the Unadilla Chamber of Commerce or the president's written designee.
Age and residency requirements. All members of the clean community commission shall be at least 18 years of age and
residents of the city or nonresident employees representing business or industries located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-42)
Sec.	2-135.	-	Quorum.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
40/240
At least four regular members of the clean community commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business,
including election of officers, and the majority of the votes cast shall determine all questions and elections.
(Prior Code, § 2-43)
Sec.	2-136.	-	Ocers.
The clean community commission shall elect a chair, vice-chair, and secretary-treasurer from it membership. Officers shall be elected on
a calendar year basis but may be reelected for succeeding terms. The chair shall be entitled to vote on all issues.
(Prior Code, § 2-44)
Sec.	2-137.	-	Meetings.
The clean community commission shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it. Meetings of
the clean community commission shall be opened to the public in accordance with the laws of the state. Written minutes of all meetings shall
be kept; and within ten days of every meeting, a copy of said minutes shall be furnished to the clerk of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-45)
Sec.	2-138.	-	Fiscal	powers;	reports	required.
The clean community commission will have the power to receive and disburse funds within the limitations of appropriations, gifts, and
grants which have been previously approved by the mayor and council, and in connection with projects or undertakings consistent with the
terms of section 2-134. The clean community commission will report to the mayor and council twice annually, at the first regular council
meeting in the months of March and September. The report will include the clean community commission's actions and accomplishments in
connection with each project or undertaking and will include as part of its report a statement of its receipts and disbursements from
whatever source and to whatever object for the preceding six months. Additionally, at the March reporting time the clean community
commission will present its proposed budget to become effective July 1, indicating its anticipated revenues. The clean community commission
shall keep such reports and accountings, and the same will be subject to verification and examination by the city auditors.
(Prior Code, § 2-46)
Sec.	2-139.	-	Contracts,	etc.,	Not	binding	on	city.
The clean community commission shall not have the power or authority to bind the city by any contract, agreement, financial obligation
or indebtedness, or otherwise; and no contract, agreement, financial obligation or indebtedness incurred by the clean community
commission shall ever be a claim or charge against the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-47)
Sec.	2-140.	-	Projects	may	be	terminated	by	mayor	and	council.
Any project or undertaking begun by the clean community commission shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of the mayor
and council of the city that the continuance thereof is not in the public interest.
(Prior Code, § 2-48)
Sec.	2-141.	-	Removal	of	members.
Any member of the clean community commission shall be removed by a two-thirds vote of the mayor and council, with the mayor having
the right to vote on the questions removal.
(Prior Code, § 2-49)
Sec.	2-142.	-	Compensation.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
41/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
All members of the clean community commission shall serve without compensation; provided, however, the mayor and council shall be
authorized to reimburse the commission members for reasonable expenses incurred in connection with their service as commission
members.
(Prior Code, § 2-50)
Secs.	2-143—2-160.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	3.	-	STANDING	COMMITTEES
Sec.	2-161.	-	Created.
The following shall be the standing committees for the city. Each standing committee shall examine into the condition of the matters
within its jurisdiction, and make such reports and recommendations as may be necessary or determined by the mayor and council:
Finance.
Fire and police.
Public property.
Parks and recreation.
Streets and sanitation.
Utilities.
Personnel.
Walnut Cemetery.
Evergreen Cemetery.
Front street project.
(Prior Code, § 2-5)
Sec.	2-162.	-	Membership.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the mayor and council, in utilizing all available resources of the city in combating the various
problems that are or may beset the municipality in the future, to make appointments to any of the city's standing or special committees of
those particular citizens of the city having special knowledge, skills, or expertise concerning the subject matter which any standing or special
committee may have jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 2-6)
Secs.	2-163—2-190.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	V.	-	FINANCE
FOOTNOTE(S):
Charter reference— Finance, article VI.
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of
any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(2); taxation, ch. 58.
DIVISION	1.	-	GENERALLY
Sec.	2-191.	-	Fiscal	year.
(8)
(8)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
42/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
b.
1.
2.
3.
c.
(5)
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on the October 1 and end on September 30 of each such fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 14-29)
Secs.	2-192—2-210.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	2.	-	BUDGET
Sec.	2-211.	-	Procedures	for	adoption	of	budget.
The municipal budget shall be introduced, approved, amended, and adopted by ordinance passed by not less than a majority of the full
membership of the mayor and council. The procedure shall be as follows:
Introduction and approval. The municipal budget shall be introduced in writing by the mayor and initially approved no
later than September 1 of the fiscal year. Upon initial approval by the mayor and council, the mayor and council shall fix
the time and place for the holding of a public hearing.
Public advertisement. The municipal budget shall be advertised after approval. The advertisement shall contain a copy of
the budget and shall set forth the date, the time, and the place of the hearing. It shall be published at least ten days prior
to the date fixed therefor in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
Public hearing. The municipal budget shall not be adopted until a public hearing has been held thereon and taxpayers
and all persons having an interest therein shall have been given an opportunity to present objections. Such hearing shall
be held not less than 21 days after the initial approval of the budget at the time and place specified in the advertisement
thereof, and may be adjourned from time to time until the hearing is closed. The budget, as advertised, shall be read at
the public hearing in full, or it may be read only by its title if at least one week prior to the date of the hearing a complete
copy of the budget shall have been posted in city hall and shall have been made available to each person requesting the
same during the previous week and during the public hearing.
Amendments.
Amendments to the municipal budget may be made prior to the time of the holding of the public hearing on the
same without public advertisement.
The mayor and council may amend the budget during or after the public hearing, except that no proposed
amendment shall be effective without such a hearing if it shall:
Add a new item of appropriation in an amount in excess of one percent of the total amount of appropriations
as stated in the initially approved budget;
Increase or decrease any item of appropriation by more than ten percent; or
Increase the amount needed to be raised by taxes by more than five percent.
Notice of hearing on any amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set therefor. Any such
amendment must be published in full in the same manner as an original publication and must be read in full at the
hearing and before adoption.
Adoption. The municipal budget shall be adopted not later than October 31 of the fiscal year. Upon adoption, the budget
shall constitute an appropriation for the purposes stated therein and an authorization of the amount to be raised by
taxation for the purposes of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-30)
Sec.	2-212.	-	Budget	message.
When introduced to the mayor and council for approval, the municipal budget shall be accompanied by a budget message which shall
explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies
of the city for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
43/240
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
financial policies, expenditures, and revenues, together with the reason for such change; summarize the city's debt position and include such
other material as will provide a complete synopsis of the financial condition of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-31)
Sec.	2-213.	-	Form	and	content	of	budget.
Generally. The municipal budget shall be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all
estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall
be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year
and actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following:
Administration, operation, and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city, including a breakdown for
salaries and wages for each such unit;
Interest and debt redemption charges;
Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable;
Cash deficits of the preceding year;
Contingent expenses in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount of administration, operation, and
maintenance expenses; and
Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the mayor and council.
Limit of total expenditures. The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue.
(Prior Code, § 14-32)
Sec.	2-214.	-	Capital	program.
Contents of capital program. A five-year capital program may be submitted to the mayor and council at the same time that the
budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include:
A clear general summary of its contents;
A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements;
Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and
The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired.
Revision and extension of information. The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital
improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
(Prior Code, § 14-33)
Sec.	2-215.	-	Emergency	appropriations.
The mayor and council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the
time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a
public emergency affecting life, liberty, safety, property, or the public peace and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues.
(Prior Code, § 14-34)
Sec.	2-216.	-	Transfer	of	appropriations.
The mayor may at any time during the fiscal year transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs
within a department or office, and the mayor and council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance
from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or
transferred during any fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 14-35)
Sec.	2-217.	-	Lapse	of	appropriations.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
44/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditures, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has
not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was
made has been accomplished or abandoned. The purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without
any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
(Prior Code, § 14-36)
Sec.	2-218.	-	Publication	of	nancial	statement.
Within six months after the close of the fiscal year a statement of revenues and expenditures, that fairly represents the financial
condition of the city and that shows all municipal accounts as of the close of such preceding fiscal year, shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-37)
Secs.	2-219—2-240.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	3.	-	PURCHASING	POLICIES	AND	PROCEDURES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— The city's purchasing policies and procedures were adopted pursuant to Ordinance Number 98-4 on November 10, 1998.
Sec.	2-241.	-	Denition.
For the purpose of this division, any emergency is defined as being a situation where immediate action is absolutely necessary and delay
would adversely affect the life, health, or safety of the citizens or the property of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-75)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	2-242.	-	Penalty	for	violation.
Any officer or employee of the city who spends or creates financial liability beyond the budgeted amount on behalf of the city shall be in
violation and will be personally liable for the expenditure or liability beyond the budgeted amount. Furthermore, a violation of any provision
of this division shall be determined a violation of the city personnel policy and shall be deemed sufficient grounds for discharge.
(Prior Code, § 14-76)
Sec.	2-243.	-	General	restriction.
Approval required. No officer or employee of the city shall purchase for or on behalf of the city or his office any materials,
supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, or equipment of any kind or character except through the approval of the mayor or the
administrative assistant to the mayor, except for emergencies as hereinafter provided. No voucher check or other method of
payment shall be honored if this method is not followed.
Conformance with purchasing procedures. It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the
city to make any purchase or aid and abet the making of any purchase by any other manner than through the mayor or the
administrative assistant to the mayor, except as provided in emergency purchases.
Purchases exceeding allotted amount. It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the city
to make any purchase or donation or to aid and abet the making of any purchase or donation that exceeds the allotted
amount set forth in the budget, except as provided in emergency purchases.
(Prior Code, § 14-77)
Sec.	2-244.	-	Approvals	required.
(9)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
45/240
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Generally. Purchases under this division up to $500.00 for any materials, supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, services, or equipm
kind may be approved by the mayor or the administrative assistant to the mayor without approval from the mayor and council, p
that same is a budgeted item. Any purchases over $500.00 shall require the approval of the mayor and council, except that in em
situations as hereinafter provided, the approval of the chair of the finance committee, the chair of the committee having jurisdict
the purchase, and the mayor, or a combination of any two shall authorize the purchase. No provisions of this division respecting t
authority of the mayor and/or others to make decisions shall in any way eliminate the requirement of mayor and council approva
provided.
Purchases exceeding budgeted amount. No officer or employee of the city may make a purchase under this division that
exceeds the amount budgeted. If a purchase or expenditure must be made that will exceed said budgeted amount, the mayor
or the administrative assistant to the mayor shall request of the mayor and council an amendment to the budget to cover such
expenditure. No purchase order may be released or liability incurred prior to the approval of the amended budget by the
mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 14-78)
Sec.	2-245.	-	Requisition	form.
The officer or employee desiring to make a purchase shall first submit to the mayor or the administrative assistant to the mayor a
requisition form to be provided by the administrative assistant to the mayor, which form shall identify the officer or employee seeking the
purchase, the department for which the purchase is sought, at least three bids on the item to be purchased or explanation as to why bids
were not obtained, the quantity of items sought to be purchased, the purchase price of each unit, and the total price and any other
information required by the administrative assistant to the mayor. Upon approval of the requisition, the mayor or the administrative
assistant to the mayor, at the mayor's direction, shall issue the purchase order.
(Prior Code, § 14-79)
Sec.	2-246.	-	Handling	of	invoices.
All invoices shall be turned in on a daily basis and shall be attached to the purchase orders. All such invoices shall be submitted to the
administrative assistant to the mayor or to his designated agent.
(Prior Code, § 14-80)
Sec.	2-247.	-	Purchase	orders	required.
Generally. No officer or employee of the city shall request any merchant, dealer, or other vendor to deliver goods to the city or
any department or officer or employee thereof, except on a regular purchase order approved by the mayor or the
administrative assistant to the mayor at the mayor's direction, except as provided hereinafter for emergencies.
Execution of purchase orders. All purchase orders must be executed by the mayor or the administrative assistant to the mayor
at the mayor's direction.
Purchases made without obtaining purchase order in advance. Any purchases made without obtaining a purchase order in
advance shall be disallowed and payment refused. No purchase order will be issued after the fact. Vendors, merchants, and
dealers will be deemed to have dealt with any employee or officer who does not have a purchase order at their own risk.
(Prior Code, § 14-81)
Sec.	2-248.	-	Emergency	purchases.
In all cases where there is immediate need for any materials, supplies, goods, wares, or merchandise by any department, such
department must advise the administrative assistant to the mayor, and if he cannot be located, the officer or employee must immediately
notify the mayor or chair of the finance committee or chair of the committee having jurisdiction over that subject matter for action pursuant
to section 2-244. In the event none of the above can be reached and an emergency purchase of the item is absolutely necessary, such
purchase must be reported to the administrative assistant to the mayor within 24 hours of such purchase.
(Prior Code, § 14-82)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
46/240
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
Sec.	2-249.	-	Discretion	on	purchases.
In all purchases where quality, as well as price and service, is involved, the administrative assistant to the mayor or finance clerk, at the
direction of the administrative assistant to the mayor, shall exercise discretion in making the purchase. In all cases where patented items or
special purpose items are requested, the administrative assistant to the mayor or the finance clerk, at the direction of the administrative
assistant to the mayor, has the discretionary authority to decide whether similar products of equal quality and at a lower price shall be
ordered in lieu of items requested.
(Prior Code, § 14-83)
Sec.	2-250.	-	Competitive	bids	and	exceptions.
Generally. It shall be the duty of the administrative assistant to the mayor or the finance clerk, at the direction of the
administrative assistant to the mayor, to make all purchases in excess of $500.00 on competitive bids except as follows:
Repair to existing equipment and motor vehicles.
Emergency purchases.
Gasoline, fuel, and oil
Routine building and maintenance repairs.
Materials and services when available only from one source.
Professional services rendered at the direction of the mayor and council.
Purchases from state or federal agency.
Bids to be kept on file. All bids for goods and materials purchased by the city shall be kept on file in the office of the
administrative assistant to the mayor and shall be subject to inspection at any time.
(Prior Code, § 14-84)
Sec.	2-251.	-	Sale	of	city	property.
Approval of mayor and council required. No property belonging to the city shall be sold except after approval of the mayor and
council.
Surplus, unserviceable, or useless property. When any property owned by the city has become surplus, unserviceable, or
useless, the head of the department in charge of the property shall certify to the mayor and council that such property is no
longer useful and should be disposed of. All sales or other dispositions of city property shall be in compliance with O.C.G.A. §
36-37-6, as amended from time to time, which section shall govern and determine the authority of the city over its property
and the procedure to be followed in disposing of same.
(Prior Code, § 14-85)
Sec.	2-252.	-	Approval	of	mayor	and	council	required.
No provision of this division respecting the authority of the mayor, the administrative assistant to the mayor, and/or others to make
decisions shall in any way eliminate the requirement of mayor and council approval, as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 14-86)
Secs.	2-253—2-270.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	4.	-	MUNICIPAL	BONDS
Sec.	2-271.	-	Municipal	bonds;	in	general.
Preliminary review by finance committee. Prior to any issue of bonds by the city, the proposal for such issue shall be referred
to the standing committee which committee shall give careful consideration to the proposal and submit a recommendation to
the council for approval or disapproval, with applicable reasons therefor.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
47/240
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(c)
(d)
Records to be kept. A complete description of each bond issued by the city shall be kept by the city clerk in a suitable book, which
be open to public inspection.
Note: Municipalities are authorized to issue general obligation bonds, but must comply with all the rules and regulations governing bond
elections, validations, etc., set forth in state law. See O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-6 and 36-82-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 14-25)
Sec.	2-272.	-	Registration	of	bonds.
Application for registration. Any holder of a bond issued by the city may register such bond as to principal and interest or as to
principal only by making written application for such registration to the city clerk and presenting the bond desired to be
registered. Each application shall state:
The number of bonds presented;
Of what issue;
The date;
The amount;
When due; and
To what extent the bonds are to be registered, and each application shall be signed by the applicant who, if holding the
bonds in any capacity other than for himself, shall sign the application in the name of the party for whose benefit he
holds the bonds, state the capacity in which he signs, and attach proof of such capacity.
Bond register. A bond register shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk in which, upon written application and
presentation of the bond by the holder thereof as hereinabove provided, shall be entered a description of each bond so
presented, which description shall state:
The bond number;
The nature of the issue;
The face amount;
The date issued;
The date of maturity;
The rate and due dates of interest;
Whether the bond is registered as to principal and interest or as to principal only;
The name and mailing address of the bond holder;
The name of the person registered the bond; and
The capacity in which such person registered the bond.
All bonds registered in compliance with this section shall be nonnegotiable to the extent registered.
Statement of registration and form. Upon registration of any bonds as hereinabove provided, the city clerk shall stamp, print,
or write upon each bond so registered a statement of the registration in substantially the following form, inserting in the
blanks the matter applicable to each transaction:
Registered by ____________. Non-negotiable. Principal (and interest) to be paid only to ____________ located at ____________. This
____________/____________/____________ day of ____________/____________/____________, 20____________.
City	of	Unadilla
____________,	City	Clerk
Procedure for transfer after registration. In order to transfer any bond which may have been registered under the provisions
of this section, the holder thereof shall present the same to the city clerk and shall authorize such transfer, in writing, giving
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
48/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
the name of the transferee, the number of the bond, of what issue, and the dates of issue and maturity. Such authority shall
be signed and acknowledged in the presence of a notary public or some other officer authorized by law to administer oaths,
and such notary public or other officer shall certify, in writing and under seal of office, that such authority was signed and
acknowledged in his presence. In addition to giving such written authority, the holder shall enter a statement of the transfer
on the face of each bond, properly dated and signed. Thereupon, the city clerk shall enter the transfer of each bond opposite
the original entry of registration in the bond register, giving the name of the transferee and date of the transfer, and shall
enter the same on each bond over his official signature. The transferee may hereafter, in the manner therein prescribed, also
transfer such bond.
(Prior Code, § 14-26)
Sec.	2-273.	-	Disposition	of	bonds	and	coupons.
Whenever the city clerk pays any bond or coupon of the city, he shall forthwith stamp, print, or write upon such bond or coupon the word
"PAID" and shall notify the standing finance committee that he has in hand such canceled paper, whereupon the finance committee shall take
possession of the same after giving the city clerk a receipt for the bonds and coupons. Such bonds and coupons shall thereafter be destroyed
by the finance committee in the presence of the city clerk, who shall then make an entry to that effect on the receipt given him.
(Prior Code, § 14-27)
Sec.	2-274.	-	Sinking	fund.
Establishment. All taxes collected for the payment of principal and interest on city general obligation bonds shall be kept by
the city clerk as a separate fund to be known as the "sinking fund." Under no circumstances shall such fund be paid out by the
city clerk for any other purpose than for the payment of the interest and principal on the bonds for which it was collected or
for the purpose of investment as provided by law and city ordinance.
Certification of amount. Prior to adoption of the annual budget, the amount to be included in the sinking fund for the
prospective fiscal year shall be certified by the municipal auditor as an amount sufficient to pay all principal and interest
coming due in such fiscal year, and the sinking fund as certified shall be included in the annual budget.
Investment of sinking fund. It shall be, and it is hereby made, the duty of the city clerk to promptly make arrangements for the
investment of the sinking fund in the manner provided by law and, upon approval of such arrangements by the mayor and
council, to promptly make such investment.
(Prior Code, § 14-28)
Secs.	2-275—2-290.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	VI.	-	IDENTITY	THEFT	AND	ADDRESS	DISCREPANCIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010 did not specify manner of inclusion. For purposes of classification and in order to
facilitate indexing, the editor has designated as Ch. 2, Art. VI.
DIVISION	1.	-	IDENTITY	THEFT	PREVENTION	PROGRAM
Sec.	2-291.	-	Short	title.
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 1), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-292.	-	Purpose.
(10)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
49/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
a.
b.
c.
The purpose of this article is to comply with the Federal Fair And Accurate Credit Transactions Act and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto (16 CFR § 681.2) in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by
responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 2), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-293.	-	Denitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply
City means the City of Unadilla.
Covered account means an account that the city offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves
or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and
soundness of the city from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks.
Credit means the right granted by the city to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase
property or services and defer payment therefore.
Customer means a person who has a covered account with the city.
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority.
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership,
cooperative, or association.
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and
drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name, and date of birth.
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city.
SSN means the Social Security Number.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 3), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-294.	-	Findings.
It is hereby found and declared by the mayor and council that:
The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision for maintenance of covered accounts for which
payment is made in arrears.
Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, electricity, gas and solid
waste.
The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: none.
The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such
accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur.
The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in
opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such
employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded.
The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any):
Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account;
Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service
restored in the previous customer's name;
Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
50/240
d.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
customer's covered account or accounts;
Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank
account, or other method of payment.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 4), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-295.	-	Process	of	establishing	a	covered	account.
As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying
information of the customer, including a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer
or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account, and any other
information or documentation necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to
access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and
shall not otherwise be recorded.
Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that
account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and
PINs.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 5), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-296.	-	Access	to	covered	account	information.
Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel.
Such password(s) shall be changed by the city clerk on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall
contain letters, numbers and symbols.
Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city clerk and the
password changed immediately.
Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such
information shall be immediately forwarded to the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 6), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-297.	-	Credit	card	payments.
In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider,
such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is
applicable to such payments.
All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account
information in the computer data base.
Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the
bank account used for payment of the covered account.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 7), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-298.	-	Sources	and	types	of	red	ags.
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment
for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include:
Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but
are not limited to:
A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report;
A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report;
A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency;
Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
51/240
1.
2.
3.
4.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(3)
a.
1.
2.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
(4)
a.
b.
1.
c.
1.
2.
activity of an applicant or customer, such as:
A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;
A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or
An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or
creditor.
Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include:
Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged;
Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant
or customer;
Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer;
Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the
financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or
An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled.
Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information
include:
Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial
institution or creditor. For example:
The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or
The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death
Master File.
Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying
information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth.
Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or
activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor.
Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone
numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity.
The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers.
The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number
submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers.
The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in
response to notification that the application is incomplete.
Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the
financial institution or creditor.
The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be
available from a wallet or consumer report.
Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include:
Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of
authorized users on the account.
A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For
example:
The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments.
An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is,
for example:
Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
A material change in purchasing or spending patterns.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
52/240
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
(5)
(1)
a.
b.
1.
2.
c.
d.
e.
f.
(2)
a.
An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the e
usage and other relevant factors.
Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted
in connection with the customer's account.
The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements.
The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account.
The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a
person engaged in identity theft.
Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing
relating to covered accounts.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 8), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-299.	-	Prevention	and	mitigation	of	identity	theft.
In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment
for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts,
such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat
of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or
probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee
deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey
this information to the city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If city clerk in
his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following
responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk:
Contact the customer;
Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than
the customer has accessed the customer's covered account:
Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an
account; or
Close the account;
Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt
collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has
caused additional charges to accrue;
Notify the debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer
account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt
collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account;
Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account
causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or
Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red
flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her
discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or
her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such
employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that
identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this
information to the city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city
clerk in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of
the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk:
Request additional identifying information from the applicant;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
53/240
b.
c.
d.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
Deny the application for the new account;
Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or
Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 9), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-300.	-	Updating	the	program.
The mayor and council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by them, update the identity theft prevention program along with
any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts
from identity theft. In so doing, the mayor and council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the
program:
The city's experiences with identity theft;
Updates in methods of identity theft;
Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft;
Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and
Updates in service provider arrangements.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 10), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-301.	-	Program	administration.
The city clerk shall be responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city clerk is responsible for
reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the
program, as necessary in the opinion of the city clerk to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of
covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the mayor and council for consideration by
them.
The city clerk will report to the mayor and city council at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements.
The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as:
The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the
opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts;
Service provider arrangements;
Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and
Recommendations for material changes to the program.
The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered
account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the
implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her
discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 11), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-302.	-	Outside	service	providers.
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city clerk
shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service
provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red
flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 1, § 12), 1-26-2010)
Secs.	2-303—2-310.	-	Reserved.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
54/240
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
DIVISION	2.	-	TREATMENT	OF	ADDRESS	DISCREPANCIES
Sec.	2-311.	-	Short	title.
This article shall be known and referred to as "treatment of address discrepancies".
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 2, § 1), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-312.	-	Purpose.
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief
that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of
address discrepancy.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 2, § 2), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-313.	-	Denitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
City means City of Unadilla.
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that
informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report
and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 2, § 3), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-314.	-	Policy.
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the
purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as
determined to be appropriate by such employee:
Compare the information in the consumer report with:
Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the
customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1);
Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other
customer account records or tax records; or
Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or
Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 2, § 4), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-315.	-	Furnishing	consumer's	address	to	consumer	reporting	agency.
In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is
required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address
discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency
when:
The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city
requested the report;
The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and
The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from
which it received the notice of address discrepancy.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
55/240
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to
agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 2, § 5), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-316.	-	Methods	of	conrming	consumer	addresses.
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address
through one or more of the following methods:
Verifying the address with the consumer;
Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address;
Verifying the address through third-party sources; or
Using other reasonable processes.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 2, § 6), 1-26-2010)
Sec.	2-317.	-	Non-waiver	of	immunity.
This article is not intended to be and shall not be construed to be a waiver of the governmental immunity of the city, or the official
immunity or any other immunity of the city or any of its agents or employees.
(Ord. No. 2010-1, (Div. 2, § 7), 1-26-2010)
Chapter	6	-	ALCOHOLIC	BEVERAGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Sec.	6-1.	-	License	required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess, for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverages where such person does not have a
license from the city to sell or possess for the purpose sale, such beverages.
(Prior Code, § 3-1)
Sec.	6-2.	-	Discretion	of	the	city.
The mayor and council, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the
applicant, application, or the proposed location of a business concerning the sale of alcoholic beverages. If in their judgment circumstances
are such that the granting of said alcoholic beverage license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may
be grounds for denying the application.
(Prior Code, § 3-2)
Sec.	6-3.	-	Applications	for	license;	false	statement	on	license	applications;	eect.
Applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages shall be made of forms prescribed therefor by the mayor and council and shall be
made in person at the office of the city clerk. The making of any statement on an application for alcoholic beverage license which shall later
be found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license.
(Prior Code, § 3-3; Ord. No. 2006-1, § 1, 1-10-2006)
(11)
(11)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
56/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Sec.	6-4.	-	Selling	to	minors,	etc.,	prohibited.
No retailer shall give, sell, or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under the age of 21 years, or who is noticeably
intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said retailer. At any time a
state driver's license shall be considered the only legal proof of age which would relieve a person making a sale from responsibility thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-4)
Sec.	6-5.	-	Employing	minors.
No person under 18 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business for the selling of alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, § 3-5)
Sec.	6-6.	-	Churches	and	schools.
No retail alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is
situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church and beyond 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college
campus, the same to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street, or highway.
(Prior Code, § 3-6)
Sec.	6-7.	-	Alcohol	regulations	relative	to	business	hours.
Applicability of section. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to every licensee, agent, servant and employee, and
any and all other persons affected.
Hours of sales generally. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any licensee or other person to sell, offer
for sale, or furnish to others any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day of the week
excepting Sundays. The retail package sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits by the holders of licenses for the
package sale of said beverages, but not the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall be lawful and
permitted on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m.
Beer and wine package sales. Licensees whose sales of alcoholic beverages consist of beer and/or wine by the package may
sell such beverages at any time except on Sundays. Such sales on Sunday shall be governed by the provisions of paragraph (b)
of this section.
Business hours for package sales. No retail dealer or licensee for package sales of distilled spirits shall be in his place of
business or open his place of business or furnish, sell, or offer for sale any distilled spirits at any time prior to 8:00 a.m. or after
11:45 p.m. For purposes of this section, establishments will be considered "open" if at any time past 11:45 p.m. there are
persons inside the establishment other than regular employees who are engaged in activities to close, clean, or stock the
establishment, or if the doors to the establishment are unlocked. The only exception to the above may be caused by
emergency repairs to equipment and/or facilities.
Business hours for consumption on the premises. Licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises
shall not keep such establishments open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week, nor at any time
on Sundays, except as herein provided. Licensees shall not sell alcoholic beverages between midnight on Saturday and 8:00
a.m. on Monday; provided, however, that licensees may be open but not sell alcoholic beverages from midnight on Saturday
until 2:00 a.m. on Sunday. For purposes of this section, establishments will be considered "open" if at any time past 2:00 a.m.
there are any persons inside the establishment other than regular employees who are engaged in activities to close, clean, or
stock the establishment, or if the doors to the establishment are unlocked. The only exception to the above may be caused by
emergency repairs to equipment and/or facilities.
Holidays. Licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may sell, offer for sale, or furnish to
others alcoholic beverages between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on New Year's Eve and 2:00 a.m. on January 2 unless any of those
hours occur on Sunday or Christmas Day. No sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall take place at
any time on Sunday, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day.
Food and restaurant establishments. Notwithstanding the above, licensees of food and restaurant establishments may rent
separate and distinct rooms for private parties to be held on Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. In such event, the licensee
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
57/240
(h)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
shall not sell or serve any alcoholic beverages. Nothing contained in this section shall allow areas commonly regarded as
lounges or bars to be open for any reason on Thanksgiving Day or on Christmas Day.
Elections. Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to the mayor and council by Act No. 750 (House Bill No. 247)
approved April 10, 1985, amending O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20 (b)(B), the sale, both wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages, to wit:
distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing
herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building
within which such polling place is established during such time as the polls are open.
(Prior Code, § 3-7; Ord. No. 2006-1, § 2, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 12-28-2006; Ord. No. 2011-6, § 1(1)—(3), 8-23-2011)
Editor's note—
Section 1(4) of Ord. No. 2011-6, adopted Aug. 23, 2011, states "Notwithstanding any other provision of Chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances,
or any other provision of the Code, no sales of alcoholic beverages shall occur in the City of Unadilla on Sunday except as expressly permitted
by the provisions of paragraph (1)[(b)] of this section."
Sec.	6-8.	-	Inspection	of	business	premises	authorized.
The business premises of the holder of a retail license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be open to inspection at all times during
operation by officers or officials of the city authorized to conduct such inspections.
(Prior Code, § 3-8)
Sec.	6-9.	-	License	to	be	displayed.
Licenses under this chapter shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which said license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 3-9)
Sec.	6-10.	-	Licensed	location.
Any business operated under the terms of this chapter must be conducted on the location specified in the license and may not be moved
to any other location.
(Prior Code, § 3-10)
Sec.	6-11.	-	Transfer	of	license.
No license issued under the terms of this chapter shall be transferable, under any condition whatsoever, and all operations of businesses
licensed hereunder shall be directed and controlled by the licensee as the principal party in interest. When the interest of the licensee in the
licensed business shall cease, the said license shall be then immediately surrendered to the mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 3-11)
Sec.	6-12.	-	Procedure	for	revocation	and	suspension	of	alcoholic	beverage	licenses.
Generally. Any alcoholic beverage license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city may be
suspended or revoked for due cause as hereinafter defined after a hearing held for the purpose of considering such
suspension or revocation. At least three days prior written notice of time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given to
the holder of such license, which notice shall contain a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held.
Due cause defined. "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of any of the following:
The violation of any law, ordinance, or regulation made pursuant to lawful authority for the purpose of regulating such
business.
The change in circumstances of any licensee in such way that had such circumstances existed when the application was
filed the license would not have been granted.
Any recurrent breaches of the peace, disturbances, or altercations occurring on licensed premises, or the failure of the
licensee or his employee promptly to report to the city and to the police department any violation of the laws or
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
58/240
(4)
(a)
(1)
(2)
ordinances governing the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, of which he has knowledge.
The existence of any other condition which would make the continued operation of the licensee's establishment
detrimental, harmful, or undesirable to the community.
(Prior Code, § 3-12)
Sec.	6-13.	-	Responsibility	for	knowledge	of	chapter.
All holders of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall keep a copy of this chapter in their premises and shall instruct any person
working there with respect to the terms hereof, and each licensee or his agents selling any alcoholic beverage shall at all times be familiar
with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in any violation of this chapter or of the laws of
the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 3-13)
Sec.	6-14.	-	Compliance	of	licensee	to	the	law.
No person shall engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this
chapter. Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this chapter shall be subject to revocation of his license and punishment as
prescribed by the mayor and council. In addition to the rules and regulations hereinabove set out, each licensee doing business in the city
under this chapter shall comply with all laws of the state, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating
to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state, and any violation of same shall subject said licensee to immediate suspension
or revocation of his retail license and also shall subject such licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and
the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-14)
Sec.	6-15.	-	Reapplication	within	one	year	prohibited.
When any license or permit to sell alcoholic beverages is rejected or revoked by the city, the city shall not accept or consider any
application from the same applicant for license within 12 months from the time of such rejection or revocation.
(Prior Code, § 3-15)
Sec.	6-16.	-	Suspension	in	the	event	of	disorder.
The city is hereby authorized to suspend the sale of alcoholic beverages under any license issued for any emergency situation such as
civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the city deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the
health and welfare of the citizens of the city. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the city
determines the emergency is over or until the next meeting of the mayor and council, at which time the suspension shall cease unless the
same is extended by affirmative action of the mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 3-16)
Sec.	6-17.	-	Separate	retail	license;	completed	building	required.
A separate retail license shall be required for each place of business wherein alcoholic beverages are sold. No license shall be issued to
any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 3, 1-10-2006)
Sec.	6-18.	-	Adult	businesses.
Prohibitions.
No business for which a license is required pursuant to the city ordinance regulating adult businesses shall be licensed to
sell, serve, or dispense alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on such premises within the
incorporated area of the city.
The following types of entertainment, attire, and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
59/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
(b)
(c)
dispense alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on such premises within the incorporated
area of the city.
The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in connection with the sale or service of alcoholic beverages
or malt beverages and wine while such person is exposing any of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined
in the city ordinance regulating adult businesses, section 18-91
Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this section or where
any person performs, or simulates the performance of, any "specified sexual activity" as defined in the city
ordinance regulating adult businesses, section 18-91
The holding, promotion, sponsoring, or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other
activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct
described in subsections (1) and (2) above.
The operation of any business for which a license is required pursuant to the city ordinance regulating adult
businesses, whether or not such business has applied for or received a license pursuant to the city ordinance
regulating adult businesses.
No license shall be issued to any business located within 1,000 feet of any adult business for which there is a license
issued by the city or for which a license is required pursuant to the city ordinance regulating adult businesses.
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the premises
from which an adult business would be operated to the nearest point on the property line of such other adult business
located within the city.
Exception. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house. For the
purposes of this section, "mainstream performance house" shall mean any establishment excluded from the definition of
"adult entertainment business" in the city ordinance regulating adult businesses, by section 18-91 thereof.
Violation. A violation of any of the prohibitions described in subsection (a) above at any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages or malt beverages and wine shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of such license subject to the
procedure set forth in the city's alcohol ordinance, section 6-12
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 2, 1-22-2008)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 2008-1, § 2, adopted Jan. 22, 2008, enacted provisions intended for use as § 6-17. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the
discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-18
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18, adult entertainment establishments, § 18-90 et seq.
Secs.	6-19—6-40.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	MALT	BEVERAGES
Sec.	6-41.	-	Denitions.
The following words where used in this article, unless context requires otherwise, shall be deemed to have the following meanings:
Club means a private organization having at least 25 adult members and organized and operating on a nonprofit basis for the promotion
of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. Said organization, to qualify as a club hereunder, must
have a meeting of its members at least once each quarter and must not operate in an illegal manner or for an illegal purpose.
Container means the can or bottle in which any malt beverage is placed and shall not mean the case or carton in which said can or bottle
is packed.
Retail sale means a sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
(Prior Code, § 3-20)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
60/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	6-42.	-	Authority	to	issue	licenses.
All applications for malt beverage retail license shall be presented to the mayor and council for approval and, if approved, shall be issued
by the city clerk upon the payment of the required fee.
(Prior Code, § 3-21)
Sec.	6-43.	-	Retail	licensee	qualications.
The retail licensee selling malt beverages in the city must be a person of good moral character and a citizen of the United
States.
Licensee shall be of legal age and shall also be a resident of the county or designate a resident of the county who shall be
responsible for any matter relating to the license.
The licensee shall not have been convicted, within five years of the date of his application, of a felony nor any violation of this
state or any other state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages.
The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted.
Any misstatement or concealment of facts in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall
make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 3-22; Ord. No. 10-2, § 1, 4-13-2010)
Sec.	6-44.	-	Application	for	retail	license.
Applications for a malt beverage retail license shall be made in person to the mayor and council of the city and shall contain the following
information:
The name, age, and address of such person or persons seeking a retail license;
The citizenship of all persons named on the application and their place of birth;
The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license; and
A statement that the application will comply with all of the terms and conditions of this chapter and any rules and
regulations propounded hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 3-23)
Sec.	6-45.	-	Retail	licenses	issued.
Licenses for the retail sale of malt beverages in the city shall be issued to such persons in such locations and in such manner as may be,
from time to time, decided by the mayor and council under the following terms and conditions:
The retail license fee shall be in an amount determined by the mayor and council for each location selling malt beverages.
No portion of said fee shall be refundable should the license be surrendered or revoked prior to its normal expiration
date.
Places where dancing is allowed (except clubs duly licensed) shall not be eligible for a license for the sale of malt
beverages.
Sale of malt beverages shall be on a packaged basis only, and drinking same on the licensed premises shall be prohibited
except for cafes, those establishments having a club license, or any establishment licensed pursuant to article IV of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-24)
Sec.	6-46.	-	Malt	beverage	tax.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
61/240
There is hereby levied and imposed, upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city, a specific excise tax in the amount
of $0.05 per 12-ounce container or proportion thereof of malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer within the corporate limits of the city
as follows:
7	ounces 2.92	cents/container $0.70/case	of	24
8	ounces 3.33	cents/container 0.80/case	of	24
12	ounces 5.00	cents/container 1.20/case	of	24
14	ounces 5.83	cents/container 1.40/case	of	24
16	ounces 6.67	cents/container 1.60/case	of	24
32	ounces 13.33	cents/container 1.60/case	of	12
½	barrel (15½	gallons) 6.00
1	barrel (31	gallons) 12.00
The excise tax provided for hereinabove shall be in addition to any license fee, tax, or charge which may now or in the future be
imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages at retail or wholesale within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-25)
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 58.
Sec.	6-47.	-	Reports	required.
Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverage within the city shall file a report by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding
calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the
month sold within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar
month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-26)
Sec.	6-48.	-	Compensation	for	collection	prohibited.
No licensed wholesale beer dealer shall accept or take from any municipality or county any fee, discount, rebate, or compensation of any
nature for the collection or reporting of the city and/or county beer taxes specified herein.
(Prior Code, § 3-27)
Sec.	6-49.	-	Failure	to	make	reports	or	remittance.
The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to 20 percent of the total
amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten percent of the
amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which such report and remittance are not filed.
The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the
amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report.
(Prior Code, § 3-28)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
62/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Secs.	6-50—6-80.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	DISTILLED	SPIRITS	AND	WINE
Sec.	6-81.	-	Denitions.
The following words where used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise, shall be deemed to have the following meaning:
Alcohol means the product of distillation of any liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include
synthetic ethyl alcohol.
Retailer or retailer distributor means any person, firm, or corporation engaged in selling at retail, any distilled spirits or alcohol, for
beverage purposes, in unbroken packages.
Spirituous liquors or distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage containing alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other
substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, cordials, or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called, to include
fortified wines as defined by the Federal Alcohol Administration, but nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale of wines from natural
fermentation of fruits, berries, and other products. Hereinafter in this ordinance the word "liquor" will be used to mean spirituous liquors,
distilled spirits and alcoholic beverages as described in this section.
Wholesaler or wholesale distributor means any person, firm, or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers of the purpose
of resale any of the distilled spirits or alcohol, as defined in this article.
(Prior Code, § 3-35)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	6-82.	-	Retail	licensee	qualications.
No retail liquor license shall be granted to any person (as defined herein) unless such person is of legal age and has been a resident of
said county for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license; same requirements apply to corporations.
(Prior Code, § 3-36)
Sec.	6-83.	-	Retail	license	regulations.
Generally. Only one retail liquor license shall be issued to any person in the city and no person who holds a retail liquor license
in any other county or municipality of the state, shall be eligible to receive a retail liquor license. Persons as used in this section
shall include all members of such licensee's family, and "family" shall be deemed to include any person related to the holder of
such license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law.
City employees ineligible for license. No employee of the city shall be eligible to receive a retail liquor license.
Scale drawings. Each application for retail liquor license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises
showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with
this chapter with reference to this section.
Separate licenses required. A separate retail liquor license shall be required for each place of business.
Building requirements; plan. No retail liquor license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will
be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless
proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The
completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue
commissioner, and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when
completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that
the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
63/240
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
(h)
(i)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises
of said building. Each applicant for a retail liquor license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or
proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building.
Sale in original packaging; minimum container size. All licensed retailers shall sell or offer to sell in the original unbroken
package only and shall sell no package containing less than one-half pint.
Limitation on products or commodities sold. No retailer shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock, at his place of
business where liquor is offered for sale, any other product or commodity except the following:
Wines, when properly licensed.
Beverages containing no alcohol commonly used to dilute distilled spirits. No beverages of any kind may be opened,
precooled, or consumed in said place of business.
Sale and delivery at place of business. No retailer shall sell or deliver any liquor to any person except in said retailer's place of
business.
Limitation on number of licenses. There shall be no more than two retail liquor licenses issued within the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-37)
Sec.	6-84.	-	Notice	to	minors.
The holder of a license to sell liquor shall post in the most conspicuous place in his establishment a sign printed in letters at least four
inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF LIQUOR TO MINORS STRICTLY PROHIBITED."
(Prior Code, § 3-38)
Sec.	6-85.	-	Inventory	of	stock	other	than	licensed	place	of	business	prohibited.
No licensed retailer shall keep any liquor stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of
arrangement whereby liquor ordered by him is stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A retailer shall keep no inventory or stock of liquor
at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business his storage space for liquor shall be immediately
adjacent to the room in which he is licensed to do business.
(Prior Code, § 3-39)
Sec.	6-86.	-	Application	for	retail	liquor	license.
Application for a retail liquor license shall be made on forms furnished by the mayor and council as follows:
For the remainder of the current year applications will be considered anytime.
A retail liquor license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A
licensee who desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a new application
for such year on or before July 15 of the preceding year.
In addition to the completion and submission of application form as required by the city, each applicant shall attach
thereto a completed application form with all attachments and requirements for a state license.
Before any retail liquor license is granted, applicant must post with the mayor and council, along with his application, a
personal performance bond; said bond to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the
licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter. Upon the violation of this ordinance or any part thereof,
the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violation as determined by the
mayor and council after a hearing is held by the mayor and council after a three-day written notice is given the violator.
Said bond is to be payable to the city in the amount of $500.00, said bond to be approved by the mayor and council and
shall be executed in a form to be furnished.
(Prior Code, § 3-40)
Sec.	6-87.	-	Applicant	qualications.
Character. Any applicant for a retail liquor license must be of good character, and all mangers, clerks or other employees shall
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
64/240
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
be of like character or application will not be considered. Corporation applicants shall be of good business reputation.
Criminal record. No applicant for a license who has a criminal record (except minor traffic offenses) shall be granted a license.
Extenuating circumstances. The mayor and council, in their discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may
reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in their judgment
circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public such
circumstances may be grounds for denying the application.
Presentation of applications. All applications for a retail liquor license shall be presented in person.
(Prior Code, § 3-41)
Sec.	6-88.	-	Falsifying	application	for	license.
The making of any statement on an application for license to sell liquor which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for
revocation of said license.
(Prior Code, § 3-42)
Sec.	6-89.	-	Games	of	chance;	prohibited.
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, lotteries or
tickets or chances therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensed retailer's place of
business or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by licensee and any violation of this section shall be cause for
suspension or revocation of license.
(Prior Code, § 3-43)
Sec.	6-90.	-	License	fees,	tax,	etc.
The annual fee for a retail liquor license shall be an amount determined by the mayor and council per annum and shall be paid prior to
the issuance of any license, said fee to accompany the application and shall be either in cash or a bank certified check.
A retailer liquor license for any portion of the current year shall be an amount determined by the mayor and council. Said
fee shall accompany the application and shall be either in cash or a bank certified check. When and if an application is
submitted for the current year by an applicant paying an amount determined by the mayor and council for the remainder
of the fiscal year, said applicant will be given credit on the following year's retail license fees based and prorated on the
number of months the retail liquor license was in use the previous year, using as a basis for computation an amount
determined by the mayor and council for each month the retail liquor license was in use. In the event a person does not
apply for a new retail liquor license for the following year, or in the event such person is not issued a retail liquor license
for the next year, said person will receive no refund for the current year. The license year begins August 1 of each year
and ends July 31 of the following year.
There is hereby levied an annual retail wine license fee of an amount determined by the mayor and council plus an excise
tax computed at the rate of $0.80 per wine gallon which shall be paid to the mayor and council on all liquors sold,
displayed or stored in said city. Said tax shall be paid to the mayor and council by the wholesale distributor on all liquors
sold to retailers in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering liquor to any
retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all
deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the month following. The $0.80 per wine gallon shall be prorated
down on half pints, pints, fifths, half gallons, etc., and wine gallons so that each bottle or each individual size container
shall be taxed on the basis of $0.80 per wine gallon. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesale
distributor to sell, ship, or deliver in any manner any liquor to a retailer without having collected said tax. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any liquor on which
such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as
reimbursement for collection of said tax.
Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the mayor and council a summary of all purchase invoices for liquor sold to
each retailer in the city on or before the tenth day of each month following such purchases. Said invoices shall show the
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
65/240
amount of excise tax paid.
(Prior Code, § 3-44)
Sec.	6-91.	-	Financial	responsibility	of	applicant.
Any applicant for a retail liquor license must show, to the satisfaction of the mayor and council, financial responsibility. Financial
statements must be submitted with each completed application as prescribed by the mayor and council. Forms of financial statements are to
be furnished by the mayor and council along with or included in application forms for license.
(Prior Code, § 3-45)
Secs.	6-92—6-120.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	IV.	-	SALES	OF	INTOXICATING	LIQUORS	BY	THE	DRINK
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, adopted Jan. 10, 2006, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 6-
121—6-136, pertained to sales of distilled spirits by the drink, and derived from the prior Code, §§ 3-50—3-65.
Sec.	6-121.	-	Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to serve prepared food with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen
will consist of a four-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the
county health department and the city fire department) prepared to serve food every hour they are open and where these establishments
are permitted to seat fifty (50) or more persons pursuant to the applicable building, fire and safety codes in effect for the City of Unadilla and
which derive at least sixty (60) percent of its total annual gross revenue from the sale of products other than alcoholic beverages.
Intoxicating liquor means any distilled or fermented liquid containing consumable alcohol, mixed with water or other substance in
solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, vodka, cordials, or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called, and including fortified
wines as defined by the Federal Alcohol Administration and shall include malt liquors, beer and ale.
License means the permit granted to licensee for the operation of an establishment for the sale of intoxicating liquors by the drink.
Licensee means any person engaged in selling, at retail or wholesale, any intoxicating liquors by the drink.
Licensor means the mayor and council of the city or other authority having control of the fiscal affairs of the city.
Person as used in this article shall include the licensee, his father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, or the spouse of any such
person or relation.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, 1-10-2006)
Sec.	6-122.	-	Qualications	for	liquor	by	the	drink	license.
No license shall be granted to any person unless such person is of legal age, is a legal resident of the county for one-year period prior to
filing an application for such license and has a license for an eating establishment as defined in section 6-121 above.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, 1-10-2006)
Sec.	6-123.	-	License	not	transferable	or	assignable;	manager	change.
(12)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
66/240
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(c)
(a)
No city intoxicating liquor by the drink license shall be transferable or assignable; and in the event that a licensed business is sold or
closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender such license to the city clerk. However, if the license was issued in the
name of a manager of a licensed business and said manager is replaced by said business, the mayor, after investigation of the new manager
has been made by the police department, shall have the right to transfer the license to the new manager upon written application from the
new manager and provided that the new manager otherwise meets all requirements to be a licensee. If a transfer of the license is allowed,
the licensee shall pay a transfer fee of $25.00.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, 1-10-2006)
Sec.	6-124.	-	Business	location.
No license shall be granted to any person for the operation of an establishment involving the sale of intoxicating liquors by the drink in
any area prohibited by law or by valid zoning ordinance; nor shall any license be granted to any person for the operation of an establishment
involving the sale of intoxicating liquors by the drink in connection with the sale of drugs or pharmaceutical supplies.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, 1-10-2006)
Sec.	6-125.	-	License	not	to	be	issued	to	persons	convicted	of	a	felony,	etc.
When contrary to the public interest and welfare no license to sell intoxicating liquors by the drink of any kind shall be issued
by the city to:
Any person as determined by the city, by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, trade
associations, personal associations, record of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not
likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or local laws.
Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude.
Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, not involved in moral turpitude,
within ten years next preceding the filing of application for such license.
Any person convicted under any federal, state, or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those
involving intoxicating liquors by the drink, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the
applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws.
No license shall be granted to any person for the operation of an establishment involving the sale of intoxicating liquors by the
drink who retains an employee, in the operation of such establishment, who has been convicted of a felony.
A consent statement shall be signed by the applicant providing that all necessary investigation reports on the applicant and
any employees in the applicant's establishment including, but not limited to, credit reports and reports from law enforcement
agencies, may be obtained. Any information in such reports may be furnished to the licensor; and the applicant will be
responsible for the cost thereof. If so requested, applicant shall also obtain such consent forms from each employee, who will
be employed in applicant's establishment. Licensor may, at its option, require fingerprinting and/or photographs of applicant
and applicant's employees for the purpose of conducting its investigation.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, 1-10-2006)
Sec.	6-126.	-	Extenuating	circumstances	involving	applicant.
In determining the question of the granting or refusal of the license provided for hereunder, licensor shall consider: the location of the
establishment; the uses of the surrounding property; the integrity of the applicant and his employees; the approval, or disapproval, of the
surrounding neighbors and/or businesses; the question of whether or not applicant holds a license for the sale of intoxicating liquors by the
package; and other relevant factors deemed by licensor to have a reasonable relationship to the desirability of the issuance of a license to
applicant for the establishment provided for in this article.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, 1-10-2006)
Sec.	6-127.	-	Annual	license	fees;	excise	tax.
Annual license fee. The annual license fee for the license provided for in this article shall be an amount determined by the
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
67/240
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
mayor and council. Such licenses shall run for a calendar year and be renewed annually, and the fee shall be paid between
December 1 and December 15 of each year, for the succeeding year, or paid with the application. Such license fees shall not be
prorated if granted after January 1 of any year.
Excise tax. In addition to the annual retail license fee required, an excise tax computed at the rate of three percent of the
charge to the public for the beverages shall be paid to the city.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, 1-10-2006)
Sec.	6-128.	-	Copy	of	regulations	to	be	kept	on	premises.
All holders of a license for the sale of distilled spirits or intoxicating liquors for beverage purposes by the drink shall keep a copy of these
regulations on his or her premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof, and each licensee or his
agents selling drinks shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof.
(Ord. No. 2006-1, § 4, 1-10-2006)
Chapter	10	-	ANIMALS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 34.
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption
prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; fishing in private ponds, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; rabies Control,
O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5; Georgia Animal
Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.;
Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or
keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX,
§ II, ¶ III(a)(3).
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Sec.	10-1.	-	City	designated	bird	sanctuary.
Designation of bird sanctuary. The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird
sanctuary.
Shooting, hunting, molesting birds prohibited; exception. It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot, or
molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. Provided, however, if vandal birds are found
to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in
the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, such authority is authorized to approve the disposal of such birds.
Preventing vandal birds from destroying crops. Any individual may prevent any such vandal birds from destroying crops or
fruit without authority of health officer.
(Prior Code, § 4-1)
Sec.	10-2.	-	Animal	and	fowl—Running	at	large	prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person having control of any wild or domestic animal or fowl to permit the same to run at
large upon any street or public ground of the city or upon the property of any other person.
(Prior Code, § 4-2)
Sec.	10-3.	-	Same—Impounding	required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person having control of any wild or domestic animal or fowl to permit the same to run at
large upon any street or public ground of the city or upon the property of any other person.
(13)
(13)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
68/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(Prior Code, § 4-3)
Sec.	10-4.	-	Same—Redemption	or	sale.
In case said impounded animals or fowl shall not be redeemed within five days from the date of their seizure, the police shall cause the
same to be advertised and sold as an estray, as provided by the laws of the state, if the owner is unknown. But if the owner is known and fails
to redeem such animals or fowl within five days after notice of their impoundment, said owner shall be deemed guilty of misdemeanor and
subject to the provisions of section 1-12.
(Prior Code, § 4-4)
Sec.	10-5.	-	Barns,	stables,	hog	pens;	location;	consent	of	neighbors.
Prohibition. It shall be an offense to build any barn, stable or hog pen within 50 feet of any of the streets of the city, except as
hereinafter provided.
Written consent of adjoining property owners. Any person desiring to build a barn, stable or hog pen within 50 feet of any of
the streets of the city shall first secure from all the adjoining property owners and from those owning property on the opposite
side of the street within 100 feet of the proposed structure, their written consent to the building of said structure, and shall file
said written consent with the clerk at the time of securing a permit for such building. The clerk shall not issue any permit for
any barn, stable or hog pen to be so located unless such consent shall be filed with him.
Filing of consent; removal for noncompliance. It shall be unlawful for any person to build a barn, stable or hog pen without
getting the consent aforesaid and filing it with the clerk, and such barn, stable or hog pen constructed without compliance as
stated above shall be removed within ten days by the owner after notice in writing by the city clerk, or by the police at the
owner's expense, as a nuisance at the expiration of said notice.
(Prior Code, § 4-6)
Sec.	10-6.	-	Cleanliness	of	premises	for	animals,	fowl.
All places and premises in the city where horses, mules, cattle, rabbits, dogs, pigs, hogs, chickens, or other animals or fowl are harbored
or confined shall be kept clean, sanitary and free of noxious odors and shall be maintained in such a manner as will effectively prevent the
propagation of flies in or about such premises. The maintaining or ownership of a place or premises in violation of this section shall be a
misdemeanor, and in addition, such place or premises shall be deemed a nuisance and may be abated in accordance with law.
(Prior Code, § 4-7)
Sec.	10-7.	-	Dead	animals.
No person shall deposit any carcass of any dead animal upon any ground, public or private, within the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-6)
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 50.
Secs.	10-8—10-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	DOGS
DIVISION	1.	-	GENERALLY
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-10, adopted Oct. 10, 2006, amended Div. 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 1, §§ 10-31—
10-39, pertained to animal control, generally, and derived from the prior Code, §§ 4-15—4-23.
Sec.	10-31.	-	Denitions.
(14)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
69/240
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
Abandonment means releasing or leaving an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of deserting the animal.
Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to
prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water.
Adequate food means palatable, non-contaminated and nutritionally adequate food that is appropriate for the species.
Adequate food does not include garbage.
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water.
Adequate shelter means a structure having three sides, a top and bottom which is suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold,
wind and rain and other elements. During cold weather, sufficient bedding inside the shelter shall be present.
Animal means any living thing, not a plant, other than man (Excludes: rodents and insects).
Animal control officer means any person assigned to enforce the provisions of this chapter as designated by the chief of the Unadilla
Police Department.
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the city or in conjunction with the county or its authorized agents for the purpose of
impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.
Governing authority means the city council in which the legislative powers of the City of Unadilla are vested.
Guard dog means any trained or untrained dog that is maintained for the purpose of safety or security and which is reasonably expected
to attack persons or other animals independently or upon command.
Humane care of animals means but is not limited to the provision of adequate shelter and wholesome and adequate food and water
consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the breed.
Inhumane care means any act, omission or neglect which causes unjustifiable physical pain suffering or death to any living animal.
Inoculation against rabies means the injection subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public
health, and administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian and a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the
veterinarian.
Jurisdiction means for the enforcement of this chapter, the incorporated areas of the City of Unadilla.
Owner means any person partnership or corporation owning, possessing, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be
deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for seven or more consecutive days.
Public nuisance. an animal shall be deemed to be a public nuisance if the animal:
Is permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner or keeper without the express consent of
such other property owner or occupant;
Attacks or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways;
Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion.
Is repeatedly at large.
Trespasses on school grounds.
Records of appropriate authority means records of any county or municipal animal control agency, records of any county board or
health, records of any federal, state or local courts, or records of an animal control officer provided for in this chapter.
Restraint means any animal which is on a leash or at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or
within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of the City of Unadilla, or in a fenced area within the real property limits of
the owner. Invisible fence systems are allowed if they are maintained in good working order and keep the animal contained. The primary
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
70/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
means of restraint within the property may not be by means of a chain, cable, rope or other stakeout or tieout device.
Running at large means any animal which is off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-32.	-	Penalty	for	violation	of	article.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-33.	-	Citations.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation for any violation to appear in Unadilla Municipal Court.
Such a citation may be issued by an animal control officer, based upon his own personal knowledge or upon a sworn written statement of
another person who has witnessed the violation, in which case the witness shall be subpoenaed to testify for the city in the court.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-34.	-	Joint	government	services.
Any county or municipality or any combination of such local governments may contract or enter into agreements with each other for joint
animal control services and codes and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment used in provision of such services.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-35.	-	Designation	and	powers	of	animal	control	ocer.
The Unadilla Police Chief shall designate an individual to carry out the duties of an animal control officer as provided in this
chapter.
One animal control agency may carry out the duties of animal control for more than one local government pursuant to a
contract or agreement under section 10-34
An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Law enforcement agencies of local governments and the sheriffs of counties shall cooperate with
animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
Persons carrying out the duties of an animal control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests unless the person is a law
enforcement officer having the powers of arrest.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-36.	-	Authority	to	remove	abused	or	neglected	animals.
Animal control officers shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused
or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect, as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The owner or possessor of the animal may
be charged according to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4 concerning cruelty to animals.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-37.	-	Interference	with	animal	control	ocer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of any animal control officer in the
official performance of their duties as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-38.	-	Restraint	of	animals.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
71/240
(1)
(2)
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep any animal under restraint which is owned by or in the custody of control or such
person.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-39.	-	Creation	of	nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-40.	-	Connement	of	female	animals	in	season.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person who has custody or control of a female animal that is in season to fail to keep the female
animal confined in such a manner that such female animal cannot come in contact with a male animal, except for intentional breeding
purposes.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-41.	-	Animal	care.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to provide his animals with sufficient and wholesome food and water, with proper shelter and
protection from the weather, with veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-42.	-	Cruelty	to	animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate
or permit any dogfight, cock fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
State law reference— Dog fighting unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160, as amended.
Sec.	10-43.	-	Abandonment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-44.	-	Exposure	of	poisons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the substance is
liable to be eaten by any animal; provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed
only with raw vegetable substances.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-45.	-	Removal	of	waste.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to:
Fail to immediately remove any excrement deposited by his animal on public property, walks, recreation areas or private
property not owned or controlled by the owner of the animal.
Fail to remove any excrement from their property and dispose of this waste on a daily basis.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-46.	-	Connement	and	quarantine	of	biting	animals.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
72/240
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
It shall be unlawful for an animal that is known to have bitten a person not to be confined for the purpose of quarantine by a method to
be determined by the county health department for a period of not less than ten days. All expenses incurred for such confinement and
observation shall be paid by the owner of such animal.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
State law reference— O.C.G.A. § 31-19 and the Georgia Rabies Control Manual as amended.
Sec.	10-47.	-	Inoculation	and	tag	required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or permit the keeping or maintaining on their premises or elsewhere
within the corporate limits of the city any dog or cat which has not been inoculated and tagged, and the owner of any dog or
cat found within the corporate limits of the city which has not been tagged and inoculated as herein prescribed shall be guilty
of a violation of this section.
All dogs and cats within the corporate limits of the city shall be inoculated and tagged in the following manner.
They shall be inoculated with a standard and effective antirabies serum or virus by a licensed and practicing veterinarian
or physician.
Upon such dog or cat being inoculated, the person so administering the inoculation shall issue a certificate to that effect
and shall deliver to the owner of the dog or cat a tag to be worn by such dog or cat.
The tag shall not be less than one inch in diameter, shall be of metal, and shall have impressed thereon the respective
serial number and year in which issued, and shall be so constructed as to permit its being hung securely around the neck
of said dog or cat.
The tag shall be worn by the dog or cat around its neck at all times during the year for which the tag is issued.
Inoculation shall be done prior to May 1 of each year and shall be effective for a calendar year for May 1 through April 30
of the following year.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-48.	-	Number	of	dogs	and	cats	per	residential	lot.
It shall be unlawful for there to be more than six (6) animals on any residential lot subject to the following exceptions:
Pet owners in compliance with any prior ordinance limiting the number of animals shall be allowed to continue to keep
said number of animals.
A litter of puppies or kittens will be permitted to remain on property for a period of 12 weeks after their birth.
Limitation does not apply to licensed foster home operators, breeders or other individuals who have been granted a
waiver by the mayor and council consistent with the procedures and criteria outlined in section 10-49
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-49.	-	Waiver	to	animal	limitations.
Upon application to and approval by the mayor and council, a citizen may keep animals in greater numbers than provided in
section 10-48 of this chapter, provided that the council finds that:
There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances existing such that a waiver should be granted;
Granting the waiver would not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to others;
The waiver will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the neighborhood; and
The applicant can demonstrate a special use or need to house animals in greater numbers than provided in section 10-
48. This item shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, participation in a licensed animal rescue organization, use
of animals for therapeutic or other purposes, emergency care of pets owned by other persons, or other circumstances
which are specified in the application for waiver.
The person making the application for such a waiver shall submit, with his/her application a fee as determined by the mayor
and council of the City of Unadilla. A sign containing information as to the proposed waiver, and the date and time at which the
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
73/240
(c)
(d)
application will be considered by the council shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property not less than 15 days
prior to the date of the public hearing.
The application shall be sent to the mayor and council for review, public hearing and approval/denial thereof. The mayor and
council shall have 30 days in which to make a decision.
Any waiver approved by the mayor and council may be revoked upon the applicant being found in violation of the nuisance
provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-50.	-	Warning	notice	on	premises	using	guard	dogs.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located to fail to conspicuously
and prominently post a notice on the outside of the property. Such notice shall comprise the words "Warning-Guard Dog" and shall be in
clearly distinguishable block letters of either red or black on white background which are easily read at a distance of 50 feet. In the case of a
guard dog being kept inside a building or fence, such notice shall be conspicuously posted upon the building or fence at a distance not
greater than 50 feet apart, as well as upon each and every entrance and exit to the building. In the case of apartments, condominiums or
businesses located within a larger building where the guard dog is located within the apartment, condominium or business solely, this notice
shall be conspicuously posted on each and every entrance and exit to the apartment, condominium or business.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-51.	-	Animals	subject	to	impoundment.
Any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this chapter, whether or not the animal is on private or public
property, may be impounded by the animal control officer in accordance with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-52.	-	Redemption	of	impounded	animals.
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the owner, if the owner is known or can be reasonably ascertained, of every
animal impounded, by telephone, if possible, or by mail, within two working days of the impoundment. The owner of any animal impounded
may claim and take custody of the animal within four working days of such impoundment by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus the
boarding fee and providing proof of rabies inoculation. If the animal is not current on rabies inoculation, the animal may be released to the
owner and the owner shall have the animal inoculated within five working days and provide a copy of the rabies certificate to the animal
control officer.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-53.	-	Impoundment	fee.
All fees for impoundment under this article shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council of the city. Impoundment fees are
separate and distinct from penalties for violations of any part of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	10-54.	-	Disposition	of	unclaimed	animals.
The animal control officer shall be authorized to dispose of any animal impounded under this article in as humane and painless a
manner as possible, or to donate any animal to a public or nonprofit institution or agency, if such animal has remained unclaimed for the
prescribed period of time or if it has been injured and is suffering or in great pain and such animal does not display an identification tag and
no determination of the owner can be made from a reasonable investigation. The disposal of any animal as provided in this section does not
relieve the owner of any liability for any violation of this chapter. If the owner of any animal is known or ascertainable, but for a valid reason
cannot be reached within the four working day period, the animal control officer shall be authorized to hold the animal until such time as the
owner can be reached.
(Ord. No. 2006-10, 10-10-2006)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
74/240
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
Secs.	10-55—10-60.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	2.	-	DANGEROUS	DOGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26.
Sec.	10-61.	-	Dangerous	dogs	and	potentially	dangerous	dogs.
Identification of dangerous dogs; notice. It shall be the duty of the dog control officer, and his designees, to identify dangerous
dogs, and the owners of dangerous dogs, within the territorial boundaries of the city. Whenever the dog control officer
classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous
dog, notice shall be given to the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification
or reclassification. Such notice shall be deemed complete upon its mailing.
Notice requirements. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements:
The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address;
The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's finding that formed the basis for the dog's classification as
a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog;
The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to
request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous
dog before the mayor and council;
The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a
dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on the day after
the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and
The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the mayor and council and shall provide specific instructions
on mailing or delivering said form to the city.
Hearing; notice. When the mayor and council receives a request for a hearing it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days
after receiving the request. The mayor and council shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and
place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in
addition thereto the mayor and council shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the mayor and
council may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's
classification of the dog. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the mayor and council shall notify the owner in writing
by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially
dangerous dog, the notice shall specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner.
Certificate of registration. Subject to the requirements of this section, the dog control officer shall issue a certificate of
registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer or if
the dog control officer finds sufficient evidence of:
A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog;
The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign
warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The sign required to be posted shall conform substantially to the
design provided by the state department of natural resources and shall meet the following guidelines:
The sign shall be in the shape of a diamond, similar to a standard highway warning sign, composed of .08 gauge
aluminum sheeting and measuring 12 inches by 12 inches.
The circle shall measure 10¾ inches in diameter. The figure of the person shall measure five inches from the top of
his figure to the bottom of his feet. The top of the dog's tail to the person's elbow shall measure 6¾ inches. The
word "DANGER!" shall measure 1⅛ by six inches.
The sign shall utilize two colors: Standard yellow and black. The background of the sign shall be in standard yellow.
The circle, the figures of the person and dog, and the word "DANGER!" shall be in black.
(15)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
75/240
d.
(3)
(1)
(2)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(e)
(a)
(b)
In addition to the registration fee and the fee required by subsection (d)(3) of this section, the owner of a dangerous
dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay the cost of the sign and the cost for a replacement sign if the original is
lost, destroyed or damaged.
Payment to the city of a fee in an amount set by the mayor and council to defray the cost of administering and enforcing
this section.
In addition, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present evidence to the dog control officer of:
A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business within the
state insuring the owner of the dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or
A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this
state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog.
Notification when dog dies, is sold or donated. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog
control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or
donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address and telephone number of the
new owner of the dog.
(Prior Code, § 4-27)
Sec.	10-62.	-	Possession	of	dangerous	or	potentially	dangerous	dog	without	certicate;	keeping	of	dog	in	violation	of	conditions	of	certicate;
conscation	and	impoundment;	destruction	of	animal.
Generally. It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog
without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with section 10-61
Dangerous dogs outside enclosures. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a
proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint
of a responsible person.
Potentially dangerous dogs outside enclosures.It shall be unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the
dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a
responsible person.
Impoundment. It shall be the duty of the dog control officer, and any person under his employ, to impound the dog if:
The owner does not secure a certificate of registration in accordance with section 10-61
The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirement of section 10-61; and
The owner does not keep the dog within a proper enclosure or permits the dog to roam or run free.
Payment of impoundment costs; notice. Any dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the
owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon payment of reasonable impoundment cost, as
fixed by a schedule approved by the mayor and council, as from time to time amended. Notice of impoundment under this
section shall be given the owner, in writing, by certified mail, at his last known address. The notice shall state that if the owner
has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days from receipt of such notice the dog shall be destroyed in an
expeditious and humane manner; provided, however, no dog shall be destroyed under this section unless it has been held a
full 20 days, exclusive of the date of giving notice.
(Prior Code, § 4-28)
Sec.	10-63.	-	Penalties.
The keeping of any dog in violation of this division shall be an offense against the city, and punishable, upon citation to the
owner, before the municipal court.
Violation of sections 10-61 and 10-62 shall be punished by the issuance of a state warrant pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28.
(Prior Code, § 4-29)
Chapter	14	-	BUILDINGS	AND	BUILDING	DEVELOPMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
76/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 34; signs, ch. 46; solid waste, ch.
50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66; zoning, app. A.
State Law reference— Access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; repair, closing
and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11;
authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or
structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; fire escapes in
buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Secs.	14-1—14-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	CONSTRUCTION	CODES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— The city has contracted with Dooly County, Georgia to issue permits, perform inspections, enforce construction codes and
otherwise administer the application of various technical and building codes adopted in the article.
Sec.	14-31.	-	Adoption	by	reference.
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and council the latest edition of the following codes and the appendixes of said codes as adopted
and amended by the state department of community affairs. Such codes are adopted by reference as if the same were fully set out at length
in this article. Copies of such codes shall be on file in the office of the city code enforcement officer:
International Building Code.
International Fuel Gas Code.
International Mechanical Code.
International Plumbing Code.
National Electric Code.
International Fire Code.
International Energy Conservation Code.
International Residential Code.
International Property Maintenance Code.
International Existing Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-1; Ord. No. 2006-05, 3-28-2006)
Sec.	14-32.	-	Penalties.
Any person or firm who shall violate any of the provisions of the above minimum construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any order made by the mayor and council, shall for each such failure, violation, or noncompliance, be
punished as provided for in section 1-12.
(Prior Code, § 5-2)
Secs.	14-33—14-60.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	WATER	CONSERVING	PLUMBING	FIXTURES
(16)
(16)
(17)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
77/240
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
(d)
(e) (1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
1.
2.
3.
(2)
(f)
(1)
(2)
Sec.	14-61.	-	Regulations.
Definitions.
Commercial means any type of building other than residential.
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or
renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a
malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building.
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or
motel.
Prohibited residential construction. On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential
building of any type which:
Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons
of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1991;
Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per
square inch of pressure;
Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush;
Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per
minute; or
Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute.
Prohibited commercial construction. On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building
initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (b)(1)
through (b)(5) of this section.
Repairs or renovations. The requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated
after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or
addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement
of toilets or showers or both.
Exemptions. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements
of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section when:
The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage
system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings;
When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation
would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed;
Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's
personal residence; or
Units to be installed are:
Specifically designed for use by the handicapped;
Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or
Toilets for juveniles.
The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an
exemption as specified in subsections (e)(1), (2) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the
building inspector for the city.
Enforcement; penalty.
This section shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations of this section may
be issued by the chief building inspector of the city.
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the municipal court of the
city. Upon conviction, a violation of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
78/240
(Prior Code, § 5-3)
Chapter	18	-	BUSINESSES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; taxation, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 66; C-1 neighborhood business district, app. A, art. IV, § 5; C-2
central business district, app. A, art. IV, § 6; I industrial district, app. A, art. IV, § 7.
State Law reference— Access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; repair, closing
and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11;
authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or
structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; fire escapes in
buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Secs.	18-1—18-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	OCCUPATIONAL	TAXES	AND	REGULATORY	FEES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 58.
State Law reference— Evidence of state license as prerequisite to local business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; .
Sec.	18-31.	-	Denitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following meaning:
Administrative fee means the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the
occupation tax.
Employee means any individual who, for compensation, exerts substantial effort within the state for the purpose of soliciting business or
serving customers or clients.
Location of office means a fixed place located within the city from which a person conducts business, but shall not include a work site
located in the city for less than six months for the purpose of serving a single customer or project.
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an
occupation, profession, or business in the city.
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee.
Practitioners of professions and occupations means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) but does not include a
practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax.
Regulatory fee means a fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city.
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee.
(Prior Code, § 14-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	18-32.	-	Administrative	fee.
(18)
(18)
(19)
(19)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
79/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in an amount set by the mayor and council is required on all occupation tax accounts
for the initial registration, annual renewal, or reopening of such accounts.
(Prior Code, § 14-2)
Sec.	18-33.	-	Regulatory	fee.
A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an
administrative fee.
(Prior Code, § 14-3)
Sec.	18-34.	-	Occupation	tax	levied;	limitations.
Generally. An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of
professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to
O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in
substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the following schedule:
First	10
employees
$20.00
Next	10
employees
18.00
Next	10
employees
16.00
Next	10
employees
13.00
Next	10
employees
 6.00
Remaining
employees
 1.00
Payment for each location. The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a
business or practitioner.
Claim of exemption; submission of documentation. A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another
local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit
documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax.
If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business
or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state,
then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax.
A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local
government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or
practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof
of as to the applicability of this subsection.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
80/240
(3)
(4)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in t
only be subject to the occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits
limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment o
tax of the other local government(s).
If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the
business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is
the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year.
Occupation tax on or after July 1.If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the
occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The
administrative fee shall not be reduced.
Estimation of employees; amended returns. If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the
basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the
business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees who are the basis of this occupation tax. If such
estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating
the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to
a business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any
reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk.
Application to real estate brokers. Real estate brokers shall be subject to an occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they
maintain a principal or branch office in the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-4)
Sec.	18-35.	-	Occupation	tax	certicate.
Every business, practitioner, and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation
tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location
within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request.
(Prior Code, § 14-5)
Sec.	18-36.	-	Professional	occupation	tax.
There is hereby set and levied upon each person practicing one of the professions enumerated in subsection (1) of this section, and who
maintains his principal office within the corporate limits of the city, a professional occupation tax to be determined by the mayor and council.
In the event an individual is engaged in the practice of more than one profession, such individual shall be required to pay a professional
occupation tax for each of the professions, except that the tax for the second and any succeeding profession shall be assessed at 50 percent
of the tax otherwise due.
Professions subject to tax. The professional occupation tax herein levied shall be levied and assessed upon practitioners
of the following professions, as defined by the laws of the state:
Applied psychology.
Architecture.
Chiropractic.
Dentistry.
Embalming.
Engineering:
Civil.
Electrical.
Hydraulic.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
81/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(b)
Mechanical.
Funeral directors.
Landscape architecture.
Land surveying.
Law.
Masseur.
Medicine.
Optometry.
Osteopathy.
Podiatry.
Public accounting.
Duty to register profession. Each person upon whom a professional occupation tax is levied by this section shall register
said professional with the city clerk on August 1 or within 45 days thereafter in each calendar year or within 20 days
subsequent to the date that such person commenced practice within the city of a professional enumerated in subsection
(1) of this section, whichever date should occur later.
Due date. The occupation tax levied by the mayor and council of the city shall be due on August 1 or within 45 days
thereafter.
Penalty for failure to make timely payment. Any person subject to the tax on or before the due date, as set forth in
subsection (3) of this section, shall be subject to a penalty or 20 percent of the professional occupation tax assessed.
(Prior Code, § 14-51)
Sec.	18-37.	-	Exemptions.
Generally. No occupation tax shall be levied on the following:
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state,
a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the
state;
Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission;
Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia;
Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products but not including any agribusiness;
Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105;
Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355;
Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for
distribution among the purchasers for use and not for sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355;
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including
animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the
same is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city;
Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or
Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States.
Affect on franchises, fees or other taxes. The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to
repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes, or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law.
(Prior Code, § 14-7)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
82/240
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Sec.	18-38.	-	Evidence	of	state	registration,	when	required.
Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the examining boards of the secretary of state's
office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may
be issued.
(Prior Code, § 14-8)
Sec.	18-39.	-	Evidence	of	qualication	required,	if	applicable.
Generally. Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or
any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show
evidence of such qualification.
Annual application continuance. Any business required to submit an annual application continuance of the business shall do
so before the registration is issued.
(Prior Code, § 14-9)
Sec.	18-40.	-	Filing	returns;	other	information	required	or	requested.
Filing returns generally. On or before October 1 of each year, an individual business, or practitioner subject to this occupation
tax ordinance shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the
number of employees of such business or practitioners during the calendar year.
Required information. Individuals, businesses, and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or
make available within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and
amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee.
(Prior Code, § 14-10)
Sec.	18-41.	-	Condentiality.
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the
occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71 et seq. Such
information may be provided to the mayor and council of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order
or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax.
(Prior Code, § 14-11)
Sec.	18-42.	-	Date	due;	penalty.
Due date. Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In
the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year,
the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity.
Penalty. Any individual, business, or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which
is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee
due.
(Prior Code, § 14-12)
Sec.	18-43.	-	Enforcement;	violations.
Administration generally. It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all
functions necessary to administer and enforce this article, and to summon violators of this article to appear before the
municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses, and practitioners for taxes and fees which
are due and owing.
Issuance of executions. The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses, and practitioners for taxes and
fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such
statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business, or practitioner
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
83/240
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation
tax or regulatory fee become delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or
fee payer located in the city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including
penalty, interest, and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city
and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or
otherwise, as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions.
Entry of nulla bonas. When a nulla bonas entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is
made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of
the nulla bona. If at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made the person against whom the execution issues pays the
tax in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such
person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax.
Fine and imprisonment. Individuals, businesses, and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory
fee charges pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for up to 30 days, or both,
or in lieu of imprisonment, it may sentence an offender, upon conviction, to labor for this city on the streets, sidewalks, square,
or other public places for a period not to exceed 90 days.
Accurate information required. Individuals, businesses, and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax
return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or
amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to
suspension of the right to conduct business.
Penalty for failure to file and pay tax. All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be
required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for persons, businesses, or
practitioners shall be subject to the same penalty imposed on the persons, businesses, or practitioners who fail to make a
return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee.
(Prior Code, § 14-13)
Sec.	18-44.	-	Public	hearing.
The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate
specified in section 18-34.
(Prior Code, § 14-14)
Sec.	18-45.	-	Prior	ordinance.
To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this article, such amounts
remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or
regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 14-15)
Secs.	18-46—18-70.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	TRANSIENT	MERCHANTS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54.
State Law reference— Exemption from local licensing of disabled veterans and blind persons, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; Georgia Charitable
Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or
itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia,
O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.
(20)
(20)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
84/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Sec.	18-71.	-	Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Peddler means any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type
of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as the selling, offering for sale, or
taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample
of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided, however, that such definition shall
include any person, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat,
hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within this city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders
for future delivery. The word "peddler" shall include the terms "canvasser," "solicitor," or "transient or itinerant photographer."
Transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor means any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee,
whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within
the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car,
or boat, public room in hotels, lodginghouses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale
of such goods, wares, and merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided, however, that such definition shall not be construed to
include any person conducting a yard sale on his own private property, or any person who, while occupying such temporary location, does
not sell from stock but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person so engaged shall not be
relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant,
or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant,
or auctioneer.
(Prior Code, § 19-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	18-72.	-	Required.
It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant, peddler or itinerant vendor to engage in such business within the city
without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(Prior Code, § 19-2)
Sec.	18-73.	-	Exceptions	to	article.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business;
Sales made by transient merchants, itinerant merchants, or itinerant vendors, as provided in section 18-71
Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers, or trustees in bankruptcy, or other public officers selling goods,
wares, and merchandise according to law;
Bona fide residents of the state selling fruit, vegetables, dressed meats, fowl or farm products which were produced on
land within the state, owned or controlled by such vendor;
Solicitations, sales, or distributions made by charitable, education, or religious organizations which have their principal
place of activity within this city.
(Prior Code, § 19-3)
Sec.	18-74.	-	Hours	of	operation.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
85/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant, itinerant merchant, peddler or itinerant vendor to engage in the business of peddling
within the city between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific
appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer.
(Prior Code, § 19-4)
Sec.	18-75.	-	Selling	ice	cream,	peanuts,	candy,	fruit,	soft	drinks,	sandwiches,	or	other	merchandise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale on any street, sidewalk, or other public property in the city any ice cream,
peanuts, candy, fruit, soft drinks, sandwiches, or other merchandise, within 560 feet of any public or private school property, or to take any
stand on any street or sidewalk for the purpose of selling any such merchandise within 560 feet of any public or private school property,
without first obtaining permission from the principal of such public or private school.
(Prior Code, § 19-5)
Sec.	18-76.	-	Selling,	soliciting,	or	delivering	goods,	etc.,	to	persons	in	vehicles	on	city	streets.
It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided for in this Code for any person to sell, offer to sell, solicit, give, lend, or deliver any goods,
merchandise, literature, products, or other matter to persons who are in vehicles upon the traveled portion of the public streets of the city.
This section shall not apply to police officers issuing summons or warnings in the performance of their official duties.
(Prior Code, § 19-6)
Sec.	18-77.	-	Permit	application.
Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the chief of police a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be
furnished by the license inspector which shall give the following information:
The name and a description of the applicant;
The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship;
The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or
produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed method of
delivery;
A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which
picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing
manner;
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance
of final delivery;
The last five municipalities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to this city;
Such other relevant information as may be required by the investigation of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 19-7)
Sec.	18-78.	-	Driver's	license.
At the time of filing an application for a permit required by this article, the applicant shall exhibit his driver's license, if he has one, to the
chief of police.
(Prior Code, § 19-8)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
86/240
Sec.	18-79.	-	False	information.
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false or misleading information in connection with an application for a permit required by
this article.
(Prior Code, § 19-9)
Sec.	18-80.	-	Application	fee.
At the time of filing the application, a fee of $5.00 shall be paid to the chief of police to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated
therein.
(Prior Code, § 19-10)
Sec.	18-81.	-	Permit	fees.
Permittees under this article shall pay a permit fee in an amount determined by the mayor and council for each day upon which business
will be conducted under this article.
(Prior Code, § 19-11)
Sec.	18-82.	-	Service	of	process.
Before any permit shall be issued under this article, the applicant therefor shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and
appointing the city clerk, or the person performing the duties of such position, his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to
acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the
business transacted under the permit, which the instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that the applicant for the license consents
and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon such agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if
personally served upon the person applying for the permit under this article, according to the law of this or any other state, and waiving all
claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city
clerk, as provided in this article, the city clerk shall send to the permittee at his last known address, by registered mail, a copy of the process.
(Prior Code, § 19-12)
Sec.	18-83.	-	Investigation;	issuance.
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this article, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of such person's business
responsibility or moral character to be made as said inspector deems necessary to the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such
investigation, the character and business reputation appear to be satisfactory, the chief of police inspector shall so certify in writing, a permit
shall be issued by the license inspector. The chief of police shall keep a full record in his office of all permits issued. Such permit shall contain
the number of the permit, the date the same is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount of the permit fee
paid, the expiration date of the permit, the place where the business may be carried on under such permit, and the name of the person
authorized to carry on the same.
(Prior Code, § 19-13)
Sec.	18-84.	-	Display.
The permit issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that the person
applying for the license shall desire to do business in more than one place within the city, separate permits may be issued for each place of
business and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business.
(Prior Code, § 19-14)
Sec.	18-85.	-	Transfer.
No permits shall be transferred without the written consent of the chief of police, endorsed on the face of the policy, showing to whom
the permit is transferred and the date of the transfer.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
87/240
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(b)
(c)
(Prior Code, § 19-15)
Sec.	18-86.	-	Records.
The chief of police shall maintain the record of the fingerprints of the permittee, together with a license number. The city administrator
shall report to the chief of police any complaints against any permittee under the provisions of this article and any conviction for violation of
this article, and the chief of police shall keep a record of all such permits and of such complaints and violations.
(Prior Code, § 19-16)
Sec.	18-87.	-	Revocation.
Causes for revocation. Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the mayor and council, after notice and
hearing, for any of the following causes:
Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for permit;
Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by the permittee in connection with the selling of goods, wares, or
merchandise;
Any violation by the permittee of this article;
The conviction of the permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
The conducting of the business permitted under this article by the permittee in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
Notice of hearing. Notice of hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this article shall be given in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be served on the permittee
by handing the same personally to the person in charge of the permitted business, or by mailing the same, postage prepaid, to
the permittee at permittee's last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
Suspension of permit pending outcome of hearing. The giving of such notice shall suspend the permit pending the outcome of
the hearing, and business operations under the permit shall cease.
(Prior Code, § 19-17)
Secs.	18-88,	18-89.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	IV.	-	ADULT	ENTERTAINMENT	ESTABLISHMENTS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2008, enacted provisions intended for use as Art. III, §§ 18-90—18-108. To preserve
the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. IV, §§ 18-90—18-108.
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6, § 6-18.
Sec.	18-90.	-	Introduction.
Based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas, Indianapolis, Indiana,
Kennedale, Texas, the deposition of Steven M. Youngelson, professor of social ecology at the University of California, Irvine taken March 13,
1999 in the case of Artistic Entertainment v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F3D 1306(2000) and the deposition of James W. Meeker, faculty
associate professor in the School of Social Ecology at the University of California, Irvin also taken on March 13, 1999 in the Artistic
Entertainment case and on the wisdom and common sense of the mayor and council of the City of Unadilla, the mayor and council take note
of the well-known and self-evidence conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do
not vary greatly among the various communities within our country.
It is the finding of the mayor and council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances
related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment,"
(whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community
(21)
(21)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
88/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
1.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
conditions. In the same manner, other adult businesses have the same deleterious effects on the community.
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial
nudity in general, and other adult businesses are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug
trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial
nudity in general, and other adult businesses are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding
neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on
the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein above described. The mayor and council finds it is reasonable to believe
that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city as well.
The mayor and council therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the
preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and playgrounds to prevent or reduce
the adverse impacts of adult business establishments. Therefore, the mayor and council finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for
any adult business establishment. The mayor and council finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate
public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable
community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or
expression. To that end, this article is hereby adopted.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-91.	-	Denitions.
For the purposes of this section and unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions are adopted:
Adult business means any business that:
Has as a substantial or significant purpose the sale or rental of merchandise that is intended for use in connection with
specified sexual activities, or that emphasizes matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
Provides entertainment where the emphasis is on performances, live or otherwise, that depict, portray, exhibit or display
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or
Provides services that are intended to provide sexual stimulation or gratification or that allow observation of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas ancillary to other pursuits, or allow participation in specified sexual
activities ancillary to other pursuits; or
The definition of "adult business" includes but is not limited to any and all of the following specific adult businesses, as
defined herein:
Businesses that offer merchandise for sale or rent.
Adult media outlet means a business engaging in the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of books,
magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs,
motion pictures, films or other media, if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that a "substantial or significant"
portion of a business is devoted to the sale or rental of such items if any one or more of the following criteria
are satisfied:
Fifty percent or more of the sales, measured in dollars over any consecutive 90-day period, is derived
from such items;
Fifty percent or more of the number of sales transactions, measured over any consecutive 90-day period,
is of such items;
Fifty percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to such
items;
Fifty percent or more of all inventory consists of such items at any time;
Fifty percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of such items at any time;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
89/240
vi.
vii.
2.
3.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
b.
1.
2.
Fifty percent or more of the stock in trade consists of such items at any time;
Fifty percent or more of the floor area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bath room,
basements or any portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to such items at any time.
This presumption shall be rebuttable.
Adult newsrack means any coin or card-operated devise that offers for sale by dispensing printed material
which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult retail establishment means a business which offers for sale or rent instruments, devises, gifts or
paraphernalia which are designed or marketed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, clothing
that graphically depicts specified anatomical areas or any of the materials sold or rented in an "adult media
outlet" as defined above, if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas." For purposes of this subsection, the presumptions relative to what constitutes a
"substantial or significant" portion of a business set forth in the definition of "adult media outlet" shall apply
hereto. In determining whether an item is "designed or marketed for use" in connection with specified sexual
activities, the following guidelines may be considered:
Expert testimony as to the principle use of the item;
Evidence concerning the total business of a person or business establishment and the type of
merchandise involved in the business;
National and local advertising concerning the use of the item;
Evidence of advertising concerning the nature of the business establishment;
Instructions, graphics or other material contained on the item itself or on the packaging materials for the
item;
The physical or structural characteristic of the item;
The manner in which the item is displayed, including its proximity to the other regulated merchandise or
signage relating to items in a display area.
Any person may request an interpretive ruling from the chief of police, or his or her designee, as to whether a
particular item is considered by the city to be "designed or marketed for use" in connection with specified sexual
activities. An application for an interpretive ruling shall be made in writing to the chief of police, and shall be
accompanied by such other information as may reasonably be requested under the circumstances pertaining to the
specific item about which a ruling is requested. The chief of police shall issue a written interpretive ruling within ten
business days following submission of a completed application. The decision of the chief of police may be appealed
to the mayor and council within 15 days following the interpretive ruling by submitting a written notice of appeal to
the city clerk. Thereafter, the mayor and council will deny or uphold the appeal within 45 days from the date the
appeal is received by the city clerk.
Businesses that provide entertainment.
Adult entertainment business means any business to which the public, patrons or members are invited or
admitted, and where "adult entertainment," as defined herein is provided. The definition of "adult
entertainment business" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater which means a theater, movie
theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live or
other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in
that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance.
Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise 80 percent of all performances or
showings.
The definition of "adult entertainment business" includes, but is not limited to, any and all of the following
specific adult entertainment businesses, as defined herein:
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
90/240
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
c.
1.
2.
3.
i.
ii.
iii.
Adult motion picture theater means an establishment with a screen or projection areas which exhibits to pa
motion pictures which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the patrons and w
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or spe
Adult theater means an establishment which provides the live performance of activities depicting or
simulating specified sexual activities or the exhibition of specified anatomical areas of live performers, for
observation by patrons.
Adult entertainment cabaret means an establishment which provides adult entertainment featuring live
performances of dancers, strippers, or male or female impersonators.
Adult entertainment studio (includes the terms "rap studio", "exotic dance studio", "sensitivity studio" or
"encounter studio") means an establishment whose premises are physically arranged so as to provide
booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises, and
which provides adult entertainment featuring live performances or materials characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult encounter parlor means an establishment which provides premises where patrons congregate,
associate, or consort with employees, performers and/or other patrons or private contractors who
display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such patrons, with the intent of providing sexual
gratification or stimulation to such patrons.
Lingerie modeling studio means an establishment which provides live entertainment where any person
appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified
anatomical areas, or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities.
Any commercial establishment that provides live entertainment where any person appears nude or in
such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas, or
where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities.
Businesses that provide services.
Bath house means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering baths
and/or showers with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas.
Adult motel means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering public
accommodations for the purpose of viewing closed-circuit television transmissions, films, movies, motion
pictures, video cassettes, video tapes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and which rents room accommodations for less than six hours at a time.
It shall be presumed that the sale, lease or rental of certain items or services constitutes a "regular and
substantial" portion of a business if any one of the following is satisfied:
Fifty percent or more of the sales, measured in dollars over any consecutive 90-day period is derived
from such sales, leases and rentals;
Fifty percent or more of the number of sales, leases and rentals measured over any consecutive 90-day
period;
Fifty percent or more of the floor area of the business (not including any portion of the business not open
to customers or patrons of the business) is devoted to such sales, leases or rentals.
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or featuring of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
Contagious and communicable diseases means any communicable or infectious disease that can be transmitted by specified sexual
activity.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
91/240
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Employee means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any
services directly related to the operation of an adult business.
Entertainer means any person who provides adult entertainment within an adult business, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted
for entertainment.
Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any person of any activity
at any adult business.
Minor means any person less than 18 years of age.
Operate means to own, conduct or maintain the affairs of an adult business.
Operator means any person owning, operating, conducting or maintaining an adult business.
Patron means any person who enters an adult business without regard to whether a purchase is made from the adult business or
compensation is paid to the adult business or any employee of the adult business for merchandise, entertainment or service, provided that
the term patron shall not include persons who enter an adult business for the sole purpose of providing service or merchandise to the adult
business and who do not remain in the adult business after the purpose has been accomplished including, but not limited to, persons
performing construction, repair or maintenance on the premises or delivering goods or merchandise to be adult business and any such
similar activity.
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, joint venture, governmental
entity, or other entity or group of persons, however organized.
Server means any person who serves food or drink at an adult entertainment business.
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below
a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified sexual activities shall mean sexual conduct, including actual or simulated acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse; or
physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks,
or the breast of a female; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts involving animals or any objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-92.	-	License	required	for	adult	business.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult business in the city unless the owner thereof has obtained an adult
business license from the city, or to operate such business after such license has been revoked or suspended by the city.
It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator or owner to knowingly perform any work, service
or entertainment related to the operation of an unlicensed adult business.
The failure to post an adult business license in the manner required herein shall be prima facie evidence that an adult
business has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any entertainer, server, employee,
manager, operator or owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in an adult business in which an adult
business license is not posted in the manner required herein had knowledge that such business is not licensed.
Any business that engages in the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records,
audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs, motion pictures, films or other media, if such business is not open to the public in
general but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant
portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into the inspection of the
business premises by appropriate city officials and inspection by those officials of only those business records necessary for
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
92/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
the limited purpose of determining whether such business enterprise is an "adult business" as defined herein. This entry and
inspection shall take place during hours when such business is open to the public, unless otherwise requested by the business,
and shall not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of such business.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-93.	-	License	required	for	managers,	servers	and	entertainers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult business without first obtaining a license to
do so from the city, or to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult business after such person's license to do so has been
revoked, suspended or has expired.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-94.	-	License,	classication	and	fees.
The license year for all fees required herein shall be from each January 1 through December 31. The application for a license
shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated herein by cash, certified or cashier's check or money order, and no
application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid.
All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nontransferable, and license fees shall be nonrefundable;
provided, however, that the license fee shall be refunded if no license is issued.
The classification of licenses and fees for each shall be as follows:
Adult business license fee, per year .....$1,000.00
Manager's license fee, per year .....50.00
Entertainer's license fee, per year .....50.00
Server's license fee, per year .....50.00
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-95.	-	License	applications.
Adult business license. All persons desiring to operate an adult business shall make a verified application with the city clerk. All
applications shall be submitted by the person who owns the adult business. The application shall be signed by the applicant
and submitted with a $500.00 nonrefundable application fee. The application fee shall be paid in cash, by certified or cashier's
check or money order. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by its president or chief executive
officer. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed by a general partner. The city clerk may require proof of
authorization before accepting an application. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall
require all of the following information:
The name, residence, address, home telephone number, occupation, date and place of birth and Social Security number
of the applicant;
The tax identification number and registered agent if the owner is required to have a tax identification number or
registered agent;
The name of the adult business, a description of the type of adult business to be performed on the licensed premises,
and the name and address of the owner of the premises where the adult business will be located;
A statement from the applicant whether the applicant, or any corporate officer or director, partner or member in
previously operating in this or another city, county or state, has had an adult business license or permit of any type
revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason for the suspension or revocation and the business activity subjected to the
suspension or revocation;
A statement from the applicant, and any person required to be identified in subsections 18-95(a)(4) and (a)(6) that each
person has:
Not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any felony,
whichever is later, within five years immediately proceeding the application, or has not been convicted of, or
diverted from prosecution on, a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor,
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
93/240
b.
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
(4)
a.
whichever event is later, within two years immediately preceding the application, where such felony or
misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography or
related offenses, or controlled substances, alcohol or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses; and
Not been convicted of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance
violation within two years immediately preceding the application where such municipal article violation involved
sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances, alcohol or illegal drugs or
narcotics or a crime of moral turpitude.
On applications requesting a license to operate a bath house the applicant shall provide for each employee, a health
certificate from a duly licensed Georgia physician stating that within 90 days prior thereto, the applicant and all other
persons working on the premises have been examined and found free of any contagious or communicable disease as
defined herein. This shall be a continuing requirement. For each person who is employed, the above described health
certificate shall be submitted to the city clerk within 48 hours of the time such person begins employment.
If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, a current certificate of registration issued by the Georgia
Secretary of State.
A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application
and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this
article regulating adult businesses.
A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches
taken within the last six months.
The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult business is to be operated,
engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement.
Failure to provide the information and documentation required herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The city clerk
shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete within ten working days of the date the application is
received by the city clerk.
Manager, server or entertainer license. Each person desiring to be a manager, server or entertainer in or for an adult business
shall make a verified application with the city clerk and submit a $50.00 nonrefundable application fee. The application fee
shall be paid in cash, by certified or cashier's check or money order. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the
person proposing to be a manager, server or entertainer. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city
clerk and shall require all of the following information:
The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, Social Security number, and any
stage names or nicknames used in entertaining;
If applicable, the name and address of each adult business where the applicant intends to work as a manager, server or
entertainer;
A statement from the applicant that the applicant:
Has not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any
felony, whichever event is later, within five years immediately preceding the application, or has not been convicted
of, or diverted from prosecution on, a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a
misdemeanor, whichever event is later, within two years immediately preceding the application, where such felony
or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography
and related offenses, or controlled substances or alcohol or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses or a crime or moral
turpitude; and
Has not been convicted of a municipal article violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance
violation within [to] two years immediately preceding the application where such municipal article violation involved
sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances or alcohol or illegal drugs or
narcotics or a crime of moral turpitude.
The applicant shall present to the city clerk, who shall copy, documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18
years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
94/240
b.
c.
d.
(5)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(1)
A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth;
An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; or
An immigration card issued by the United States of America.
Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months.
Failure to provide the information required herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The city clerk shall notify the
applicant in writing at the home address set forth in the application whether or not the application is complete within one
working day of the date the application was received by the city clerk.
Application processing. Upon receipt of an application, license fee and application fee for an adult business, manager, server
or entertainer license, the city clerk shall immediately transmit one copy of the application to the chief of police for
investigation of the application. In addition, the city clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the building official. It shall
be the duty of the chief of police to investigate such application to determine whether the information contained in the
application is accurate and whether the application meets the requirements herein for issuance of the license for which the
application is made. The chief of police shall report the results of the investigation to the city clerk not later than 20 working
days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the building official to determine whether
the structure where the adult business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the
applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance articles of the city. The building official shall report the
results of his investigation to the city clerk not later than 20 working days from the date the application is received by the city
clerk. Upon receipt of the reports from the chief of police and the building official, the city clerk shall schedule the application
for consideration by the mayor and council at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting, provided the license application for an
adult business, server, manager or entertainer license shall be approved or disapproved within 45 days from the date when
the mayor and council will consider the application and shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at that meeting.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-96.	-	Examination	of	application,	issuance	of	license,	disapproval.
The mayor and council shall examine an application for an adult business license, or a manager, server, or entertainer license
within 45 days of the date such application was received by the city clerk. After such examination, the mayor and council shall
approve the issuance of a license if the appropriate license fee has been paid, the applicant is qualified, and all the applicable
requirements set forth herein are met. No license shall be approved for any person ineligible pursuant to the provisions
herein. All incomplete applications shall be denied.
The record of the mayor and council shall show the action taken on the application, and if the license is granted, the mayor
and council shall direct the city clerk to issued the proper license. The adult business license and all manager, server and
entertainer licenses shall state that it is not transferable to other persons or entities and the calendar year for which it is
issued.
If an application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be notified within five working days by registered or certified
mail to the applicant's last known address, and the notification shall state the basis for such disapproval.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-97.	-	License	ineligibility	and	disqualication.
No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to:
An applicant for an adult business license if one or more of the following conditions exist:
The premises for which an application for an adult business has been made is located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of
land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located or upon which another establishment regulated
or defined hereunder is located, any school, church, licensed child care center, public park or property zoned or used for
residential purposes, which uses are located within the city limits. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the premises from which the adult business would
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
95/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
be operated to the nearest point on the property line of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic
beverages is located or upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located, any school, church,
licensed day care center, public park or property zoned or used for residential purposes located within the city;
The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application;
The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application;
The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable health,
zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the city, provided, that upon a showing that the
premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for
reconsideration by the mayor and council;
The applicant or any person identified in section 18-95(a)(6) has been convicted, released from incarceration for
conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth herein in section 18-95(a)(7) during the time period set forth herein;
The applicant or any person identified in section 18-95(a)(4) and (a)(6) has had an adult business license or comparable
license revoked or suspended by this or any other governmental body during the past five years;
If the applicant is applying for a license to operate a bath house and applicant has not produced a health certificate as
required herein for all persons working on the premises; or
The applicant is merely a surrogate or nominee acting on behalf of one who would otherwise not be eligible for a license.
An applicant for a manager, server or entertainer license if one or more of the following conditions exist:
The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction diverted on any of the crimes set forth
herein in section 18-95(b)(3) during the time period set forth herein;
The applicant failed to provide all of the information required on the application;
The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application;
The applicant has had a manager, server or entertainer license revoked or suspended by this or any other governmental
body during the past five years; or
The applicant is applying for a license for a manager, server or entertainer in a bath house and has not produced a health
certificate as required herein.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-98.	-	Standards	of	conduct.
The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by all adult businesses, their employees and all managers, servers and
entertainers and patrons of adult businesses, while on or about the premises of the business:
Identification cards. All or any manager, server or entertainer issued a license by the city under the provisions contained
herein shall, at all times when working in an adult business, have in their possession a valid identification card issued by the
city, bearing the license number, the employee's physical description and a photograph of such employee. Such identification
cards shall be laminated to prevent alteration.
Age restriction. Only persons 18 years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of any adult business.
Exterior observation. The premises of all adult businesses will be so constructed as to insure that the interior of the premises
is not observable from the exterior of the building. In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of
the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with an anteroom or foyer will be covered so as to prevent
observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building.
Exterior display. No adult business will be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of live performers engaged
in an erotic depiction or dance featuring or displaying specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined
herein, from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
Certain acts prohibited:
No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron shall perform any specified sexual activities as defined herein, wear
or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates any specified anatomical area, use artificial devices or
inanimate objects to perform or depict any specified sexual activities or participate in any acts or prostitution as
prohibited by state law or municipal ordinance while on the premises of an adult business;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
96/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
b.
(5)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(f)
(g)
No employee, server, entertainer or patron of an adult business while on the premises of an adult business shall
knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of another person, or knowingly permit another person
to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of such employee, server, entertainer or patron, whether such
specified anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed;
No employee, manager, server or entertainer of an adult business shall be visible from the exterior of the adult business
while such person is nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any specified anatomical area;
No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or gratuity from any patron for any act prohibited herein and
while on the premises of an adult business and no entertainer shall receive any payment or gratuity from any patron for
any entertainment except as follows:
While such entertainer is on the stage a patron may place such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage;
or
While such entertainer is not on the stage but while on the premises of an adult business and is clothed so as to not
expose to view any specified anatomical area, a patron may either place such payment or gratuity into the
entertainer's hand, or under a leg garter worn by such entertainer at least four inches below the bottom of the
pubic region.
No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the premises of an adult business shall:
Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages or wine to be brought upon, sold or consumed on the
premises;
Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug
or narcotic on the premises;
Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of 18 to be in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment
business;
Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or patronizing prostitution on the premises, as prohibited by state
law or municipal ordinance; or
Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this article or any other city ordinance provision or state law.
Signs required. All adult entertainment businesses that provide live entertainment shall conspicuously display in the common
area at the principal entrance to the premise, a sign, on which uppercase letters shall be at least two inches high, and
lowercase letters at least one inch high, which shall read as follows:
THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
IS REGULATED AND LICENSED
BY THE CITY OF UNADILLA
ENTERTAINERS ARE:
•Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct or prostitution on the premises or to fondle, caress or touch the
breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, patron or other entertainer or to permit any employee, patron or
other entertainer to fondle, caress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of said entertainer.
•Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from any customer for entertainment except as follows:
While such entertainer is on the stage, by placing such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage; or
While such entertainer is not on the stage, by either placing such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand, or under the
entertainer's leg garter.
CUSTOMERS ARE:
•Not permitted to be upon the stage at any time.
•Not permitted to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any server, entertainer or patron or
in solicitation for prostitution.
Lighting required. The premises of all adult businesses shall be equipped with overhead lighting of every place to which
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
97/240
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(l)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
patrons are permitted access, at an illumination of not less than 3.5 foot-candle per square feet, as measured at the floor level,
and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any patron is present in or on the premises.
Closed booths or rooms prohibited. The premises of all adult businesses shall be physically arranged in such manner that the
entire interior portion of any booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls is visible from a common area of the premises. Visibility shall not
be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever.
Ventilation and sanitation requirements. The premises of all adult businesses shall be kept in a sanitary condition. Except as
otherwise provided herein, separate dressing rooms and rest rooms for men and women shall at all times be maintained and
kept in a sanitary condition.
Hours of operation. An adult business may be open or in use only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday
through Friday and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m. on Sunday.
Facilities necessary. No adult business license to conduct a bath house shall be issued unless an inspection by the building
official, or his/her authorized representative reveals that the premises on which the applicant intends to conduct such
business complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are
given or showers taken. Floor shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt, ore refuse. All equipment used in the
business' operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen, and items for personal use of
operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths, and sheets shall not be used for more than
one patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is changed for every patron. No
activity related to an adult business shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within any permitted
establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked.
Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or
more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets
after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a
vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
The building official shall certify that the proposed business establishments complies with all of the requirements of this section
and shall give or send such certification to the city clerk. Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to
eliminate other requirements of state, county or city statutes or articles concerning the installation and maintenance of
premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof. The appropriate city official may recommend the issuance of a license
contingent upon the compliance with any requirements in this section.
All dancing performances or entertainment by entertainers at adult businesses shall occur on a platform intended exclusively
for the purpose which is raised at least 24 inches from the level at the floor and no dancing shall occur closer than four feet to
any patron.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-99.	-	License	posting	or	display.
Every person licensed as an adult business shall post such license in a conspicuous place and manner on the adult business
premises.
Every person holding a server, manager or entertainer license shall post his or her license in his or her work area on the adult
business premises so it shall be readily available for inspection by city authorities responsible for enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-100.	-	Manager	on	premises.
A manager shall be on duty at all adult businesses at all times the premises are open for business. The name of the manager
on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours.
It shall be the responsibility of the manager to verify that any person who provides adult entertainment or works as a server
within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer or server's license and that such licenses are prominently
posted. It shall also be the responsibility of the manager to insure minors do not enter upon the premises of an adult
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
98/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
entertainment business.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-101.	-	Inspectors	and	inspections.
All adult businesses shall permit representative of the police department or any other city official acting in their official capacity to inspect
the premises as necessary to insure the business is complying with all provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-102.	-	License	suspension,	revocation,	or	nonrenewal.
Whenever the city clerk has information that:
The owner or operator of an adult business or a holder of a manager, server or entertainer license has violated, or
knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of, any of the provisions of this article; or
There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this article that have occurred under such circumstances that the
owner or operator of an adult business knew or should have known that such violations were committed; or
The adult business license or the manager, server or entertainer license was knowingly obtained through false
statements in the application of such license, or renewal thereof; or
The adult business licensee or the manager, server or entertainer licensee knowingly failed to make a complete
disclosure of all information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or
The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer or director of an adult business, or a shareholder owning
20 percent or more of the stock in a corporation that owns an adult business, has become more disqualified by a
conviction as provided herein; or
The holder of a manager, server or entertainer license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as
provided herein.
Then the city clerk shall make this information known to the mayor and council, which, upon five day's written notice to the
person holding the license at the licensee's last known address, shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether the license
should be suspended or revoked. The mayor and council may pass a resolution setting forth the procedures for the conduct of
such hearings. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine witnesses, with or without legal counsel.
Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the mayor and council may take any of the following actions:
Suspend the license for up to 90 days;
Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year; or
Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one year, on the condition that no further
violations of the ordinance occur during the period of probation. If a violation does occur and after a hearing the violation
is determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of the license year.
The mayor and council shall make its decision within ten working days of the hearing and should promptly notify the
licensee in writing.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-103.	-	Renewal.
A license may be renewed by making application to the city clerk on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall
expire on December 31 of each calendar year, and current licensees shall submit applications for new licenses no earlier than
November 1.
Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a license issued under the provisions of this article shall be
renewed by issuance of a new license in the manner provided herein.
If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time provided herein, the expiration of such license shall not
be affected, and a new application shall be required.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
99/240
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-104.	-	Judicial	review.
Following the entry of an order by the city clerk suspending or revoking a license issued pursuant to this article, or disapproving the
renewal application for a license, such licensee or applicant may seek judicial review in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-105.	-	Penalty.
Any person knowingly violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the maximum punishment as provided in the city
charter.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-106.	-	Regulations.
The city clerk shall have the power to promulgate regulations as may be necessary and feasible for carrying out of the duties of his/her
office and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-107.	-	Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this article, or the application thereof to any
circumstances, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of the article.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Sec.	18-108.	-	Application	to	existing	businesses.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all adult businesses existing on the effective date of this chapter as well as to all adult
businesses established after the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1, 1-22-2008)
Secs.	18-109—18-120.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	V.	-	MASSAGE	ESTABLISHMENTS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-3, adopted Apr. 27, 2010 did not specify manner of inclusion. For purposes of classification and in order to
facilitate indexing, the editor has designated as Ch. 18, Art. V.
DIVISION	1.	-	IN	GENERAL
Sec.	18-121.	-	Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Massage means any manner of manipulation, including but not limited to the rubbing, touching, stroking, kneading or vibrating of the
superficial parts of the body, by direct or indirect physical contact with any portion of the body of a massage technician or by any form of
contact with a massage apparatus.
(22)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
100/240
(a)
(b)
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or
instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power which is utilized by a massage technician for the
purpose of administering a massage.
Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs one or more massage technicians or any business that
owns and operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, including but not limited to bathhouse equipment, and which, for
a good or valuable consideration, offers facilities and personnel to the public for the administration of massages.
Massage technician means any person, whether male or female or whether or not a masseur or masseuse by profession, who by direct
or indirect physical contact with the body of another or by use and operation of a massage apparatus and for any good or valuable
consideration administers a massage.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. I, § 1), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-122.	-	Records	of	licensee.
It shall be the duty of any licensee under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons
receiving treatment at the establishment, the type of treatment administered and the name of the person of the establishment administering
the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police, the city council or such other party as the city
council shall designate to review or inspect such records.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. I, § 1), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-123.	-	Names	of	employees	led	with	police	chief.
It shall be the duty of every licensee under this article to file with the city police department the names of all employees, their home
telephone numbers and addresses. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees must be filed with the city police
department within three days from the date of any such change.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. I, § 1), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-124.	-	Patronage	of	massage	establishment	by	underage	person.
Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any unemancipated person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment
unless such person carries, at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given and signed by a
regularly licensed physician and such person's parent or guardian. Such parental consent must be signed in the presence of
the massage technician or the massage establishment operator.
Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of the persons
patronizing such massage establishment, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such
massage establishment. It shall be conclusively presumed that the operator of such massage establishment knows the correct
age of all persons patronizing the establishment.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. I, § 1), 4-27-2010)
Secs.	18-125—18-140.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	2.	-	LICENSES
Sec.	18-141.	-	Licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor or for any person to
allow a massage technician to administer massages without first having obtained the license required by this division.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. II, § 5), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-142.	-	Qualications	of	massage	establishment.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
101/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A corporate applicant for a massage establishment license must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the sec
state to do business in the state. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the massage establishment. Applications shall
submitted to the city through the city police department on forms provided by the department.
No massage establishment license shall be issued unless the application required in this section and all the attached
documentation and exhibits so required shall have been filed by the applicant, and no license shall be issued if it appears that
the application has been materially falsified or if the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained
therein.
No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection discloses that the establishment complies
with each of the following minimum requirements:
A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided
also that all such signs shall otherwise comply with the general sign requirements of this Code;
Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code and, additionally, at least one artificial light
of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth;
Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code;
Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used for massage shall be provided;
Hot and cold running water shall be provided;
Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen;
Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for customers;
All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be kept in good
repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;
Clean and sanitary towels and linen shall be provided for customers receiving massage services; no common use of
towels or linen shall be permitted; and
The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license, must be in complete compliance with the city fire code, the city
electrical code, the city plumbing code, and with all other requirements of federal, state, county and municipal law
designed to protect the health, welfare and safety of the persons who come into contact with the establishment.
All massage technicians shall be completely clothed during all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this
subsection, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and
either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and means having on the lower body appropriate
undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and such pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches
above the knee. The holder of the license shall have the license subject to revocation for violation of this subsection.
The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within a massage establishment is expressly prohibited.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. II, § 6), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-143.	-	Application.
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage establishment shall make application to the city for an appropriate
investigation. Such application shall be in writing, addressed to the mayor and city council, and shall set forth the following:
The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names used by the applicant;
The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the two years immediately
preceding the date of application;
Sworn affidavits of at least one bona fide residents of the county that the applicant is a person of good moral character;
Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 21 years;
The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair;
Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size;
The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application;
Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous
operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore and any business
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
102/240
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation;
All convictions of violations of any laws and the grounds therefore;
The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the city, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the
application;
If the applicant is a corporation, in addition to the information required in this section, submit a complete list of the
stockholders of the corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. II, § 7), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-144.	-	Fees.
Each new and renewal application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall include a nonrefundable
investigative fee of $125.00. A license fee of $2,000.00 shall be paid by the establishment applicant prior to issuance of an
annual license.
Renewal fees shall be the same as the original license fee.
The regulatory fees in this section are in addition to all other license fees as prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. II, § 7), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-145.	-	Inspection	and	investigation;	issuance	procedures;	term.
If such application for a license required under this division is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits
required, and accompanied by the correct investigative fee, an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the city
police department. The chief of police shall make a recommendation to the city council as to whether to grant or deny the
license. If all requirements of all departments concerned, as well as those qualifications specified in this division are met, the
license shall be issued.
All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be valid for a period of one year.
In the event that the city council should deny an applicant license he or she shall have the right to a hearing before the city
council to determine if there is just cause for the denial under this chapter. Once requested by the applicant, notice shall be
served upon the applicant in the manner specified by section 18-147, hereunder.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. II, § 8), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-146.	-	Transferability;	change	of	location;	display;	inspection	of	establishment.
Transferability. All licenses issued under this division are nontransferable; however, a change of location of a massage
establishment may be permitted pursuant to this division.
Change of location. A change of location of the massage premises shall must be approved by the city council, provided all
sections of this Code are complied with and the change of location fee of $75.00 is first paid.
Display. Every person to whom a license shall have been granted under this division shall display the license in a conspicuous
place.
Inspections. At least four times each year, an inspection of each massage establishment shall be made for the purpose of
determining that the sections of this article are met. Notice may or may not be given of such inspection, and no warrant shall
be required.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. II, § 9), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-147.	-	Revocation.
The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds:
Failure of the holder to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license.
The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or
municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants.
The premises are in violation of the city's building code or of this subsection.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
103/240
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The original application or renewal thereof contains materially false information or the applicant has deliberately sought to
information contained therein.
The holder or any of the holder's employees or agents has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a
felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of incest, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency,
prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire or the distribution of material
depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law and in connection with the operation of the massage
establishment.
The holder or the holder's employees have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any section of this article.
Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the
premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers.
No license issued under this division shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have been held before the
license review board to determine just cause for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at
least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaints against the holder
of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held.
The notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the notice personally or by leaving such notice at the place of
business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license holder
cannot be found and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner provided in this section, a copy of such
notice shall be mailed registered postage, fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at the license holder's place of
business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing.
Any massage establishment operator having the license revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license for 12
months immediately following the revocation.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. II, § 10), 4-27-2010)
Sec.	18-148.	-	Disposal	of	inventory	after	revocation	or	suspension.
If the license of an operator under this division is suspended or revoked for some violation of this article, the mayor shall provide a
period of time not to exceed 15 days for the holder of such license to dispose of the inventory.
(Ord. No. 10-3, § 1(Art. II, § 11), 4-27-2010)
Chapter	22	-	CEMETERIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54.
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial
grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.
Sec.	22-1.	-	Municipal	cemeteries	established.
The Walnut Cemetery and The Evergreen Cemetery are created and established as municipal cemeteries to be administered and
managed by the city.
Sec.	22-2.	-	Interment	requirements.
All interments in the city shall be in organized, established cemeteries as provided for in this chapter. Anyone violating the provision shall
upon conviction be punished as provided for in section 1-12.
(Prior Code, § 6-1)
Sec.	22-3.	-	Responsibility	for	cemeteries.
(23)
(23)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
104/240
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
The responsibility for the operation, maintenance, and general supervision of all municipal cemeteries shall be vested in the department
of streets and sanitation whose department head shall have the following duties:
To look after and take proper care of all municipal cemeteries and see that no lot in any of said cemeteries is used or
occupied in violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated by the mayor and council;
To see to the digging of interment places and to the proper entering of deceased persons when called upon to do so.
(Prior Code, § 6-2)
Sec.	22-4.	-	Management	of	cemeteries.
The responsibility for the management of all municipal cemeteries shall be by the city clerk who shall keep full and detailed accounts of
the expenditures and receipts issued or collected upon all municipal cemeteries.
(Prior Code, § 6-3)
Sec.	22-5.	-	Purchase	and	conveyance	of	lots.
The mayor and council shall place a value upon all unsold lots in the municipal cemeteries, and shall have the city clerk record such
valuations on an official map or plan of each cemetery, which maps shall be kept on file, open to public inspection, in the office of the city
clerk.
Method of purchase. Any person desiring to purchase an easement in a particular lot or lots, for the purpose for which it
is intended, shall be permitted to do so upon payment of the price fixed for such lot or upon making arrangements,
according to rules and regulations that may be established by the mayor and council, for the purchase of such lot or lots
on an installment plan.
Manner of conveying. Conveyances of burial lots shall be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and city clerk and
have affixed thereto the seal of the city. Such conveyances shall not convey fee simple title, but shall convey to the
purchaser or each burial lot an easement for the exclusive right to interment and sepulture in such lot, shall state the
maximum number of graves allowed on each such burial lot as shown by the plat, and by reference therein made shall
convey each lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter as fully as if set out in each such conveyance.
Recordation of deed. At the time the city conveys any burial lot, the city clerk, in addition to collecting the purchase price
thereof, shall collect from the purchaser an amount sufficient to have such conveyance recorded in the office of the clerk
of the superior court of the county and shall have such conveyance so recorded before delivery thereof to such
purchaser. No sale or transfer of any such burial lot or any right therein, nor any subdividing of any burial lot by any
purchaser or those claiming under him, shall be valid unless approved in writing by the city or until the deed of transfer
and such written approval are recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county.
Records of ownership. The city clerk shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all lot easements in the
municipal cemeteries, of the burial capacity of each lot, of the location of each grave, of the names and ages of the
persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be used, and of the date of burial of each.
Sale or transfer by owner. Owner of lots shall not be permitted to sell or transfer lots without the written consent and
approval of the mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 6-4)
Sec.	22-6.	-	Rules	for	interment.
No deceased person shall be interred in any municipal cemetery until the city clerk has found:
That the lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for;
That the person arranging for such burial has the right to the use of such lot;
That such lot is not used beyond its capacity; and
That proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and of the exact location of the grave.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
105/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(Prior Code, § 6-5)
Sec.	22-7.	-	Restrictions	on	use.
Enclosures. No curbing, fencing or enclosure of any sort shall be erected on, in or around any burial lot in the cemetery, but
the city reserves the right to erect curbing along the walks and driveways, if it so desires.
Plantings. The planting of flowers and shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within a municipal cemetery
shall be done only after the plans for such work shall have been submitted to and approved by the mayor and council. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the decoration or adornment of any gravesite with potted or cut flowers or
plants.
Stones and monuments. Owners of cemetery lot easements shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking
the burial site, except that no slab shall be set other than in a horizontal position and flush with the ground.
Headstones shall not exceed two feet in height above the ground and 18 inches in width and shall be set in a solid
concrete foundation.
Monuments of cut stone or marble shall not exceed ten feet in height and the erection of same must be authorized and
supervised by the head of the department of streets and sanitation.
(Prior Code, § 6-6)
Sec.	22-8.	-	Cemetery	regulations.
Trees and shrubs. No tree or shrub shall be planted, removed, cut down or destroyed within the borders of any burial lot,
walks or lawn spaces, without the approval of the mayor and council.
Injury to monuments. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or in any manner injure any monument, enclosure,
or ornament thereof within any municipal cemetery.
Discharging firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any gun, pistol or other firearm within any municipal
cemetery except at a military funeral.
Depositing offensive matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any part of any cemetery or any land adjoining it
any dead carcass, garbage, or offensive matter whatever.
Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner within the
perimeter of any municipal cemetery.
Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertisement or sign, or to solicit any work in a municipal
cemetery.
Unauthorized interments. It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of a municipal cemetery
without the express authorization of the mayor and council.
Disinterment. Disinterments shall be made only when authorized by the mayor and council and the county board of health.
(Prior Code, § 6-7)
Sec.	22-9.	-	Authority	of	the	city	to	regulate.
The mayor and council of the city reserve, to themselves and their successors in office, the right to alter, amend, modify or add to the
rules, regulations, conditions and restrictions herein set forth at any time it is deemed advisable so to do in order to carry out the purposes of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-8)
Sec.	22-10.	-	Liability	of	the	city.
There shall be no liability whatsoever, either tort or contractual, on the part of the city, or its officials of officers, or their successors in
office, or its agents or employees, to any purchasers of any lots in the cemetery, or to any person holding under them, or to the family or
relatives of any person buried in the cemetery or to any person or the family of such person, who has erected any monument or marker
therein, by reason of any act or acts, thing or things, omission, negligence or otherwise relating to the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 6-9)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
106/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Sec.	22-11.	-	Nonmunicipal	cemeteries.
In any district permitting nonmunicipally owned cemeteries, the following requirements shall apply:
The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the
vicinity of such site. In addition such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare.
Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than two acres.
All structures shall be set back no less than 15 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line.
All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 20 feet from any property line or minor street right of way lines,
and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right of way line.
The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained.
(Prior Code, § 6-10)
Sec.	22-12.	-	Unadilla	Cemetery	Commission.
Established. There is hereby established the Unadilla Cemetery Commission.
Duties and powers. The duties and powers of the said commission shall be to study, investigate and develop plans for
improving the care, maintenance, and cleanliness of the public cemeteries of the city; advise with and recommend plans to the
city for the improvement of said cemeteries; to serve as trustee for any monies donated to the city for the public cemeteries
and advise the city as to the use of any such trust funds; and otherwise promote public interest in the general development of
the appearance of the cemeteries. Provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and
duties of the other commissions, departments, boards, and other like agencies of the city.
Composition. The Unadilla Cemetery Commission shall consist of five members, who shall be of lawful age and shall be
appointed by action of the mayor and council. At least four of the members shall be residents of the city.
Chair. The Unadilla Cemetery Commission shall elect a chair from its membership who shall serve a two-year term.
Term of office. Initially, one of the appointees shall be appointed for a one-year term, one for a two-year term, one for a threeyear term, one for a four-year term and one for a five-year term. As terms expire, all appointments thereafter shall be for five
years with the terms expiring on December 31.
Compensation. All members of the Unadilla Cemetery Commission shall serve without pay.
(Prior Code, § 6-11)
Chapter	26	-	ENVIRONMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; dangerous dogs, § 10-61 et seq.; buildings and building development, ch. 14; health and sanitation, ch.
34; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 66; zoning, app. A.
State Law reference— The Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of
junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings
or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; limits on sound
volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-
14; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-
71(c); nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; authority to
demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures,
O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; removal of improperly
parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13; authority to control air quality, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(13).
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
(24)
(24)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
107/240
Secs.	26-1—26-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	SOIL	EROSION,	SEDIMENTATION	AND	POLLUTION	CONTROL
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Sections I—X of Ord. No. 2011-4, adopted May 24, 2011, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 26-31—26-39, and enacted a new
Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control, and derived from Ord. No. 2006-04-A, §§ 1, 2,
adopted March 28, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-04-B, §§ 1—14, adopted July 25, 2006. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation.
Sec.	26-31.	-	Title.
This article will be known as the "City of Unadilla Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § I, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-32.	-	Denitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated:
Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and
resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and
Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.
Board means the board of natural resources.
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the
protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil
and Water Conservation Commission.
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).
CPESC means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and
Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below
original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as "excavation."
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: Engineering, architecture, landscape
architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a
current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc.
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative.
District means the Ocmulgee River Soil and Water Conservation District.
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources.
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material
that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management,
drainage control, or flood control purposes.
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
(25)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
108/240
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7,
that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in
subsection 26-34(c) of this article.
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or
an excavation.
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered
by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste
disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent
permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent
vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region;
or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of
construction.
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and
shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into
state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of
land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 26-33(5).
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are
occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of
documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer
design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on
a specific plot.
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a).
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental
and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the
light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in
which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit.
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit.
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the
ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to
ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person
authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply
with other permit conditions.
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a
receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
109/240
(1)
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board,
public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate
body or any other legal entity.
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized
prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion
and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in
which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI
submittal.
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as
concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway
consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of
origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by
the Ocmulgee River Soil and Water Conservation District.
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent
structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or
gravity.
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater
runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to
implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq.,
and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f).
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other
bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the Georgia which are not
entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing
areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or
disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment
basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be
found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the
Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and
regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water
supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which
there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are
streams into which no other streams flow except springs.
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas
by covering the soil with:
Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
110/240
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway,
gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and
including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § II, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-33.	-	Exemptions.
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following:
Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968."
Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work,
fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion;
The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a
larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not
otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to
the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction
covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters
classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer
zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been
wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer
zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters,
the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet.
Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which
no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller
buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this
paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority;
Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of
the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the
production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the
production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals;
the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and
farm ponds;
Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices
cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 26-
34(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be
allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after
completion of such forestry practices;
Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the
United States Department of Agriculture;
Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any
land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
111/240
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(1)
greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state
waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events
and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible
for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any
such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on
which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority
from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of
this section;
Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of
transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or
maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or
maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or
more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of
transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a
project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy
of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing
authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been
issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders;
Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any
public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory
jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or
any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power;
except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory
jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United
States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located
within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing
authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been
issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and
Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § III, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-34.	-	Minimum	requirements	for	erosion,	sedimentation	and	pollution	control	using	best	management	practices.
General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if
requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities
which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution
control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control
plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements
of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site,
including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall
be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in
accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit.
Minimum requirements/BMPs.
Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing
activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense
to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any
substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f),
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
112/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed"
mean design in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment
Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b).
A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly
designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local
issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia
Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being
increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten
nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured
in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance
associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or
sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres.
Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any landdisturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to
O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs.
The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of
the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur.
The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in [subsections] (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-
7-6(c).
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of
governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit;
and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and
resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for
Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1
of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following:
Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize
erosion;
Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential;
Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum;
Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development;
Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable;
To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized
when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.;
Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the
sloping of fills;
Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other
property owners;
Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not
feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum;
Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or
control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude
sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
113/240
(15)
a.
b.
(16)
a.
b.
(d)
Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state wat
horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the dire
to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the d
to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequa
control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral st
this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only durin
short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which g
not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along
stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Qu
Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirem
to any such buffer:
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed
state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final
stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective
vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient
quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family
residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy,
may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water
quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and
The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as
measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of
disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated
into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream
crossings for sewer lines; and
There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by
normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2
of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be
constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average
annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the
landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any
such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement
for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity,
provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are
implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer:
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed,
state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final
stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective
vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient
quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family
residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy,
may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water
quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and
The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as
measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of
disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated
into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream
crossings for sewer lines.
Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations,
ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
114/240
(e)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(b) and (c) of this section.
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall
neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of
the permit.
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § IV, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-35.	-	Application/permit	process.
General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the
general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They
shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention
ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within
the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may
obtain a permit.
Application requirements.
No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of City of Unadilla without first
obtaining a permit from the Dooly County Building Inspections Office to perform such activity and providing a copy of
notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable.
The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Dooly County Building Inspections Office and must include the
applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include,
as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans,
together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried
out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection 26-34(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit
will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control
plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site
prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10.
In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such
fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the
primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned
development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance
permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the
division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9)
or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction.
Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application
and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation
and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to
act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be
forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and
any variances required by subsections 26-34(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if
required as per subsection 26-35(b)(6) have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority
and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and
approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review
authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing
authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal.
If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and
Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the
local issuing authority may deny the permit application.
The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash,
irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of
the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
115/240
(c)
(1)
(2)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be
forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into
compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for
hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit
violations.
Plan requirements.
Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 26-34(b) and (c) of this article, or
through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering
practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article.
The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological
characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed
waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and
supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land
development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall
meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the
process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board
created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20.
Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and
pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the landdisturbing activity was permitted.
Permits.
Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local
issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all
applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may
be undertaken.
No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has
been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance
with this article, any variances required by subsection 26-34(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if
necessary, as per subsection 26-35(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be
furnished to the applicant.
Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any
other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such
requirements upon the local issuing authority.
If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase.
The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land
affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of
a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the
conditions contained in the permit.
The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion
and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. §
12-7-7(f)(1).
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § V, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-36.	-	Inspection	and	enforcement.
The Dooly County Building Inspections Office will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits
have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
116/240
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(1)
in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary,
secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be
responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting landdisturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management
practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for
installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is
deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with
permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice
shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be
completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in
violation of this article.
The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the
Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975.
The Dooly County Building Inspector shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary
to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or
private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities.
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission,
the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall
any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties.
The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been
certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide
technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or
municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division
and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found.
The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing
authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration
and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the
district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified
pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in
accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority
of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days
within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or
municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke
the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority.
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § VI, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-37.	-	Penalties	and	incentives.
Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a landdisturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of
his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority.
Stop-work orders.
For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a
written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected
within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing
activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation
presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted
without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work
order in lieu of a warning;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
117/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work ord
All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective
action or mitigation has occurred.
When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts
of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being
discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and
maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All
such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective
action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the
exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls.
Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply
with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures
necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the
person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this
article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one
under the provisions of subsection 26-35(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited
and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance.
Monetary penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this
article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director
issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal
courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of
law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of
competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this
article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day
during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § VII, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-38.	-	Education	and	certication.
Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any landdisturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement
with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board
created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20.
For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary
permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion
and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training
certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on
that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of
development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit.
Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site
may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article.
If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification
requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and
operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-
7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph.
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § VIII, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-39.	-	Administrative	appeal	judicial	review.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
118/240
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authori
finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is
of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the
a hearing before the Unadilla City Council within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal.
Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative
remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Dooly County.
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § IX, 5-24-2011)
Sec.	26-40.	-	Eectivity,	validity	and	liability.
Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the first day of July, 2010.
Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional,
such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article.
Liability.
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall
relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose
any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property.
The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall
neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the
terms of the permit.
No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the
Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any
waters of the state as defined thereby.
(Ord. No. 2011-4, § X, 5-24-2011)
Secs.	26-41—26-70.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	NOISE
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Muffler required, noise producing devices on vehicles, § 42-8.
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument
from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c); nuisances,
O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5.
Sec.	26-71.	-	Excessive,	unnecessary,	and	unusually	loud	noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud
noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others, within the
limits of the city. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but
said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car, or
other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such
signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any
horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any
reason held up.
Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner
(26)
(26)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
119/240
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible
at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
Loud speakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is the case upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in
any office or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop-work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of property city
authorities.
Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises therefrom.
Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner
as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading
any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest
of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a
period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of
three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and
safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets
and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience
would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the
work.
Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution
of learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital provided conspicuous signs
are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or court street.
Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to
any performance, show, or sale.
Metal rails, pillars, and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel, or
other material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, trays, cars, trucks, or in any other manner so
loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.
Street railway cars, operation thereof. The causing, permitting, or continuing any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable
noise in the operation of a street railway car.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
120/240
(16)
(17)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pn
hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.
Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of
which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled
and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.
(Prior Code, § 11-19)
Sec.	26-72.	-	Application	for	special	permit.
Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this article on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the city
administrator or his duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the city administrator hereunder shall contain all conditions upon
which said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The city administrator or his duly
authorized representative may grant the relief as applied for if he finds:
That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with this article; or
The activity, operation, or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply
with other subsections of this section; and
That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and
The city administrator may prescribe any conditions or requirements he deems necessary to minimize the adverse
effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood.
(Prior Code, § 11-20)
Secs.	26-73—26-100.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	IV.	-	PROPERTY	MAINTENANCE
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 11-03, adopted April 12, 2011, repealed the former art. IV, § 26-101 and art. V, §§ 26-131—26-
134, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former arts. IV and V pertained to vegetation control and junk. See the Code
Comparative Table for a complete derivation.
DIVISION	1.	-	GENERALLY
Sec.	26-101.	-	Purpose.
This article is enacted for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing the use, occupancy, condition, and maintenance of
property, dwellings, buildings, and structures; establishing minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to make dwellings, buildings, structures, and surrounding premises safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and
habitation; promoting and protecting the public health and safety through the control of weeds and grass which constitute a fire hazard;
fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators, and occupants of dwellings; authorizing the inspection of dwellings and
structures; providing for the condemnation of all buildings and structures deemed unfit for human use and habitation and providing for
removal of such buildings at public expense after hearing; and for other purposes.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-102	-	Denitions.
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:]
(27)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
121/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Accessory structure means a structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the primary dwelling or structure and which is attached
thereto or located on the same lot. "Accessory structure" includes, but is not limited to, any portable, demountable, or permanent enclosure,
shade structure and carport, or garage.
Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction.
Applicable codes mean:
Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or
operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property;
Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and
Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in
O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real
property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time
such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law.
Approved means approved by the city.
Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Boardinghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which the owner or operator
rents space to five or more persons with one or more meals regularly served as part of the rental or for a separate charge.
Cellar means that portion of a building having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry.
Dangerous structure means any of the following:
Abandoned or vacant structure that constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the
property on which the structure is located and which is not fenced in or otherwise protected to reasonably prohibit public
access thereto.
A structure that is severely damaged by fire, storm or other natural or manmade causes and which has remained in such
damaged condition for a period of six months or more and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons
who may come on or near the property on which it is located.
A structure that is in a condition of being partially constructed and construction thereon has ceased for a period of 12
months or more and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the
property on which it is located.
Any combination of the foregoing which would constitute a hazard to the safety and welfare of any person living or
property located adjacent thereto.
Department means the sheriff's department, or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce the provisions of this
article.
Director means the sheriff or the representative thereof. When a department other than the police department is designated to enforce
this article, the term means the director of that department or the designee of such director.
Domestic sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designated or intended to dispose of domestic sewage which
includes byproducts of domestic activities.
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, as amended from time to time, known as the
Georgia Controlled Substances Act.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
122/240
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or
commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The terms "dwellings", buildings", or
"structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or
structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products.
Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating, whether or not such unit is occupied or vacant.
Egress means a means of exit from a structure or dwelling unit.
Extermination means the control or eradication of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal
pest elimination methods.
Family means two or more persons living together, whether related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and having common housekeeping
facilities.
Floor space means the total area of all habitable space in a building or structure.
Flush water closet means a toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water-sealed trap above the floor level.
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking, and serving of food and the storage of
produce, tin cans, glass containers, and newspapers.
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Unadilla.
Grade means the average elevation of the ground adjoining a building or structure.
Habitable room means any room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
Heated water means water which has been heated sufficiently to ensure a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit at the
outlets.
Inspection warrant means a warrant authorizing a search or inspection of private property where such search or inspection is necessary
for the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article.
Junked vehicle means any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck, or other vehicle or any vehicle which does not bear a current
license plate and a current state inspection sticker.
Maintenance means the act of keeping buildings, structures, and equipment in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline or
failure.
Mobile home means a detached single-family dwelling unit, designed for long-term occupancy, which has been prefabricated and then
transported to its site or to a sales lot on its own wheels and requires only minor work before occupancy, such as connection to utilities or a
foundation.
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the
home or residence of more than two families living independently of each other, each doing its own cooking in such dwelling. "Multiple
dwelling" includes a flat or apartment.
Municipality means any incorporated city within the State of Georgia.
Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, eating, or having actual possession of a dwelling or rooming
unit.
Operator means any person who has charge, care, or control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
123/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.
Parties in interest means:
Persons in possession of said property and premises;
Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or
interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the
structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title
examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia;
Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or
structure; or
Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure.
Plumbing means the practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, repair, extension, and alteration of all piping fixtures,
appliances, and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting systems and
the public or private water supply systems within or adjacent to any building, structure, or conveyance; also the practice and materials used
in the installation, repair, extension, or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste, or sewerage and water supply systems of any premises to their
connection with any point of public disposal or other approved terminal.
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including dwellings, buildings, or structures thereon.
Proper or properly means in accordance with the general provisions of this article and in accordance with standards of cleanliness,
stability, and safety as required by this article.
Property means land and whatever is erected or growing upon or affixed thereto.
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any
department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other
activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality.
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8, and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this
article adopted under said sections to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers.
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable
codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and
accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure.
Rooming house means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the
owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the
owner or operator.
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not
for cooking or eating purposes.
Safety means the condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease.
Sanitary sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designed and intended to dispose of sanitary and domestic wastes
including all liquid and solid wastes from the flush toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower, and clothes washing machine.
Stairway means one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and
uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure.
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed
of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Trash means putrescible solid wastes, consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials such as, but not limited to, paper,
cardboard, yard clippings, wood, glass, crockery, and similar materials.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
124/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Unfit for human habitation means designation of dwellings or dwelling units as so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or
vermin-infested that such create a serious hazard to the health or safety or which lack illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public.
Unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not
necessarily for cooking or eating purposes.
Unsanitary condition means the presence of a condition which is conducive to the spreading of disease or illness, or is conducive to
harboring insects, rodents, or other pests.
Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space.
Water and sewer system includes private wells, public water utility mains, private septic tanks, sewage disposal systems, and public sewer
mains.
Workmanlike condition of maintenance and repair means that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful
manner and in accordance with the requirements of all applicable ordinances.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-103.	-	Article	remedial.
This article is remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, through structural strength,
stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings, rooming houses, buildings, structures, premises, or properties.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-104.	-	Scope	and	application.
Every building, dwelling, or structure in the incorporated area of the city, whether occupied or vacant, shall conform to the
requirements of this article, irrespective of when such building may have been constructed, altered, or repaired. Every such
building, structure, and premises shall be subject to and conform with the requirements of this article. When a unit is vacant,
the full application of the article may be held in abeyance for an indefinite period, provided the exterior complies with this
article, the interior has been cleaned of trash, rubbish, and debris, and the unit has been secured in a manner approved by the
city and is maintained in that closed and inaccessible manner until it is fully repaired. Where applicable, this article also
governs the condition of unimproved property.
Repairs and alterations in restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering such building in
conformity with this article in such manner as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard may be made
with approved materials similar in kind to those of which such building is constructed.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, altered, repaired,
maintained, or used in the city except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by statute or ordinance.
Where repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance, and work required to meet the provisions of this article are regulated
and/or required to be permitted by other ordinances, such repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance, and work shall be
done only in accordance with those ordinances.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-105.	-	Violations.
A person who violates a provision of this article or fails to comply with this article is guilty of an offense. The owner of a building,
structure, or premises, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, or any person who may have assisted in the
commission of such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-106.	-	Penalties.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
125/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Any person, firm, or corporation that shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they
now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation in municipal court shall be subject to a fine and/or
imprisonment in accordance with article IV, section 4.13, of the Charter of the City of Unadilla. Where any offense or violation continues from
day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-107.	-	Unsafe,	unsanitary,	etc.,	structures	prohibited.
All dwellings, buildings, or other structures which are unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous to human life or which, in relation to
existing uses, constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment are
unlawful.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-108.	-	Weeds,	junk,	etc.,	prohibited.
Persons shall keep their property free of those weeds and underbrush which create a health menace, fire hazard, or an unsafe
or unsanitary condition as well as trash, garbage, junked vehicles, or other things thereon which constitute a violation of the
provisions of this article.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or occupant of a dwelling, rooming house, building, or structure to use the
premises of such property for the open storage of any household appliance, glass, building material, building trash, or similar
item. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of such owner, operator, or occupant to maintain the premises of such
property and to remove from the premises all abandoned items as listed above, including, but not limited to, weeds, dead
trees, trash, and garbage, upon notice from the city.
Owners and occupants of property shall not permit weeds or grass within 150 feet of any building or structure to grow on such
property to a height exceeding 18 inches.
Owners and tenants of property or structures abutting a street, sidewalk, lane, or parking area on which the property or
structure abuts shall maintain the property or structure clean and free of garbage and trash; however, city maintenance
responsibility for public rights-of-way shall not be diminished by this section.
Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining
these parking areas free of garbage and trash shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the owners and tenants of
these premises.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for the owner of any private property and/or the person in possession
thereof to cause or allow one or more junked vehicles as defined in this division to remain on such property for more than 60
days without being repaired and placed in operable condition and, in the case of junked vehicles, with a current license plate.
Whenever the department finds that such a condition exists, the department shall give to the owner and the person in
possession of the property upon which such vehicle is located the notice required by section 26-117 of this chapter and in the
manner required by that section that such vehicle is declared to be a junked vehicle, having remained on the property for
more than 60 days in an inoperable condition without being repaired and placed in operable condition, and/or, without a
current license plate, and that its presence on the property is unlawful and a violation of this division and that within 30 days
from the receipt of the notice the owner and/or the person in possession of the property is required to remove such vehicle
from the property, or within such period of time shall cause the vehicle to be repaired and placed in operable condition and, in
the case of vehicles, provided with a current license plate, or removed from the property. Any such person failing to comply
with such notice shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided by section 26-105 of the property maintenance article,
and each day such failure continues shall be a separate offense punishable under this division, and the department shall cite
and prosecute for all such offenses. Vehicles remaining on the property in violation of this section are declared to be
nuisances, and the department shall proceed to pursue all available remedies to abate such nuisance and to cause the
condition to be remedied.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-109.	-	Compliance	prerequisite	to	utility	services	for	substandard	dwelling.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
126/240
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
Electrical utility service shall not be reconnected to any vacant building or dwelling unit which is unfit for human habitation and has been
without electrical utility service until such building or dwelling unit has been brought into compliance with this article.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-110.	-	Demolition	of	structures.
Demolition of any structure shall not begin until all of the following conditions are satisfied:
A permit for demolition has been secured from the city.
The county health director has inspected the premises and accepted an appropriate vermin and rat extermination plan.
All utilities are cut off and capped at the street.
Within the time specified in the demolition permit:
All debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble, and foundation exposed above the ground level shall be removed from the
premises.
Any excavation or other depression must be filled to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent
stone or masonry and all filled areas must be adequately sloped and drained.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Secs.	26-111,	26-112.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	2.	-	ADMINISTRATION	AND	ENFORCEMENT
Sec.	26-113.	-	Enforcement	generally.
The department shall enforce the provisions of this article. Authorized agents of the department are vested with the police
power necessary for the purpose of issuing copies of charges and prosecuting persons charged with violating this article.
The department shall receive applications and issue permits and certificates required by this article. The department shall
make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of this article are met. The department shall enforce all laws relating to
the construction, alteration, repair, installation, erection, removal, demolition, use, location, and maintenance of buildings,
equipment, appliances, or systems, except as may be otherwise provided for in other ordinances or regulatory measures. The
department shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the interests of the city so require, make investigations in
connection with matters referred to in this article and render written reports on the same. The department shall issue notices
or orders as may be necessary to enforce compliance with this article, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions or to secure the
necessary safeguards.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-114.	-	Coordination	of	enforcement.
Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this article shall be the exclusive
responsibility of the department. Wherever, in the opinion of the director, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by
any other department, the director shall arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be
subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. An order for correction of any violation under this article
shall not be issued without the approval of the director, who shall have the responsibility before issuing any such order to determine that it
has the concurrence of any other department or official of the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-115.	-	Civil	liability.
No officer or member of the city council, or employee of the city, charged with the enforcement of this article, in the discharge of duties,
shall be rendered liable personally, and such officer, member or employee is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this article.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
127/240
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(e)
(f)
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-116.	-	Appeals.
Any person receiving a notice of violation under this article may, within ten days following the date of such notice, enter an
appeal to the city council by filing a notice in writing with the department. Such appeal shall state the location of the property
involved, the date and number of such notice, and the variance or modification requested and reasons therefor. The
department shall forthwith transmit to the city council all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
Appeals shall be heard by the city council in the following cases:
Where the literal application of the requirements of this article would appear to cause undue hardship on an owner,
operator, or occupant.
When it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this article or any of the provisions herein have been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted.
The city council may, in conformity with this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director. It shall be the duty of the
director to carry out the decisions of the city council.
The city council shall not have jurisdiction over appeals arising out of an order of the director pursuant to section 26-113, and
any such appeal shall be subject to the provisions of such section.
A decision of the city council under the provisions of this article shall be final but shall be subject to writ of certiorari to the
superior court.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-117.	-	Notice	of	violations,	etc.
Upon receipt of information that property, buildings, systems, appliances, or equipment covered by this article are unsafe, the
department shall cause to be made an inspection. If it is found that an unsafe condition exists, the department shall cause a
written notice to be served upon the owner.
The notice shall include the following:
An enumeration of conditions which the department has determined are in violation of this article.
An enumeration of remedial action required for each determined violation.
A specified period of time within which such remedial action shall be completed, such period of time for completion to be
determined by the department as the period of time reasonably required under the known circumstances for the
completion of the remedial action.
A statement adequate to notify the person served of the provisions respecting the right of appeal.
A statement adequate to notify the person served that a failure to comply with the provisions of this article within the
time specified in the notice is unlawful and the penalty for such failure.
A copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of the director.
Notice shall be deemed perfected if served upon the owner or occupant as may be appropriate in any of the following ways:
In person.
By certified mail with return receipt attached and posting a copy of the notice upon the property.
Whenever the department determines that property, buildings, systems, appliances, or equipment, or any work in connection
therewith that is covered by this article is being erected, installed, altered, repaired, or demolished in violation of this article,
the department shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefore directing the discontinuance of
such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation.
In case such notice or order is not complied with, the department may issue a citation for violation of this article or may
request the city attorney or other proper prosecuting authority to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity to correct or remove such violation, or restrain the execution of work thereon, or prevent the use of any building,
system, appliance, or equipment in violation of this article or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
128/240
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A purchaser, transferee, lessee, or mortgagee who has actual or constructive knowledge of the issuance of a notice shall be boun
notice as of the date of such sale, transfer, lease, or mortgage.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-118.	-	Inspections.
Inspections required under the provisions of this article shall be made by the department. Upon evidence of probable cause
and presentation of proper credentials, authorized agents of the department may enter, at reasonable times, any building,
structure, or premises in the city in order to enforce this article.
Any building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, maintained, or used in the city
shall be subject to inspection by the department.
No official or employee of the department making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for
repairs or corrections shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be
required by this article.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-119.	-	Inspection	warrant.
The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in
this article. The warrant shall authorize the director or agents thereof to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with
or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this
article.
Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following
conditions are met:
The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be
inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable
cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of
that property.
The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this article.
The inspection warrant shall be issued only if it meets all of the following requirements:
The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant.
The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur
and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably
determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection.
The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or
reveal.
The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-120.	-	Owner's	right	of	entry.
Every occupant of a building, dwelling, or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agents or employees, access to any
part of such building, dwelling, or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of maintenance, improving or making
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article, or with any lawful rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-121.	-	Records.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
129/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
The department shall keep comprehensive records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, inspections made, reports
rendered, and notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection at office hours observed by the department, but
shall not be removed from the office of the director.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-122.	-	Stopping	work.
Whenever the department determines defective or illegal work is performed in violation of a provision or requirement of this article, it
shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped until such defective or illegal work is corrected.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-123.	-	Placarding	premises.
The department may place a dated and signed placard on property which is in violation of this article, and notify the owner of
such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known address that the building has been
placarded. Such notice shall specify the reason therefor and the owner's right of appeal as provided in this chapter. Such
placard shall contain the following words:
"The City of Unadilla has declared this building dangerous and unfit for human habitation. The use or habitation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to occupy the dwelling, structure, or premises or for an owner to allow occupancy
of a dwelling, structure, or premises which has been placarded, if such dwelling, structure, or premises is, or becomes, vacant
after placarding or, in all events, within 60 days from the date of placarding unless the violation has been corrected.
The owner of the property shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council as provided in this article.
The posting of the placard and the recording of same in the records of the department shall be notice to the general public
that it is unlawful for any owner to allow the dwelling or structure to be occupied, as provided herein. No further notice shall
be required to be given to any subsequent owner.
It shall be unlawful to deface, alter, destroy, cover, or remove such placards. The department shall remove the placards when
compliance with this article has been effected.
If the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure and
clean the premises, the department may proceed under section 26-115 hereof.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-124.	-	Correction	of	violation	by	city	at	expense	of	property	owners—Generally.
In the event the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure
and/or clean the premises, any further proceedings against said owner, parties in interest, and/or the property shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of section 26-116 et seq., as herein amended. In addition thereto, the department may, in addition to other
remedies, issue a citation for violating any requirements or provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-125.	-	Duties	of	owners;	appointment	of	public	ocer;	procedures	for	determining	premises	to	be	unsafe	or	unhealthful.
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain
such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances
which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any
dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances.
The mayor and council of the City of Unadilla appoint or designate the chief of police and his or her designees as public
officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article.
Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the City of Unadilla
charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
130/240
(d)
(1)
(2)
(e)
(f)
and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or
constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer
shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer determines from
investigation or inspection that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial,
industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the
commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe
conditions, the public officer may issue and file in the municipal court a complaint in rem against the lot, track, or parcel of real
property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance
exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such
dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official
tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and
contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the
owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place
within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the
filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to
appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing.
If after such notice and hearing the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human
habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is
vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health
or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the
complaint or appeared at the hearing an order:
If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in
relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the
order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the
applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in
connection with the commission of drug crimes; or
If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance
with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value
of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove
said dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property.
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the
dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided,
however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. The income and
financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs
of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser
classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41 of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors
without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to
bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may
cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, and/or demolished, as
provided in said order. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a
placard with the following words:
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable
codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the
public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and
unlawful."
If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
131/240
(g)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or
applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application
of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid.
The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged
materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials.
The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax
commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real
property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred.
The lien provided for in the foregoing paragraph shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the
order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Dooly County and shall
relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 26-127 of this chapter. The clerk of
the superior court, as required by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b)(1), shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the
deed records of Dooly County and enter the line on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other
liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After
filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of the superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order
and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. As required by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b)(1) and (2), it shall be
the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem
taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods
available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.;
provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing
a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the Unadilla City Council.
Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties on unpaid real property
ad valorem taxes.
The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. §
41-2-7 et seq., unless such costs are waived by resolution of Dooly County. Any such amount collected and retained for
administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien.
The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a
contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling,
building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation.
Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair,
alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court
under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29.
The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, option building,
fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general
nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as
provided in this article.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-126.	-	Determination	by	public	ocer	that	under	existing	ordinances	dwellings,	buildings,	or	structures	are	vacant	and	sample	conditions	of
nuisances.
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is
unfit [for] its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he or she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure
which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of
neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city.
Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing):
Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
132/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities;
Dilapidation;
Disrepair;
Structural defects;
Uncleanliness; and
Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment.
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used
in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of
drug crimes being committed.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-127.	-	Service	of	complaints.
Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the
complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business
days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons
shall be served in one of the following ways:
Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be
perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by
ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of
the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected;
Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 4 of Title 48, of the O.C.G.A. (specifically, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78); or
Statutory overnight delivery.
If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside the county, service shall be perfected by certified
mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings, and
mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing.
Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing addresses are known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight
delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing
addresses are unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which
the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing.
In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or a person laboring under
disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served; and if such guardian or personal
representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in
subparagraph (f) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be
perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the
date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person
or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person.
In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the
proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein the property or interest is located shall be personally
served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the
place of and to protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen.
In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public
officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as
provided in this article, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve it by publication in the manner
provided in subparagraph (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected.
A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building
or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and
effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
133/240
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article
owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at
hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-128.	-	Powers	of	public	ocers.
The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers:
To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein
are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated,
and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes;
To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence;
To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in
such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and
To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as may be provided by
the city.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Secs.	26-129,	26-130.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	3.	-	DWELLING	UNITS
Sec.	26-131.	-	Compliance.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let or sublet to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended
to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein which does not comply with the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-132.	-	Sanitary	facilities.
Generally. Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet, all in good
working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and wastewater
pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions.
Location. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same.
The water closet, tub or shower, and lavatory shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user.
Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower an
adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system
connected to a potable water supply.
Water heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe
and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount to be
drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees
Fahrenheit. Such water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling or
dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of this division are not in operation.
Heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good
working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms to a temperature of at
least 70 degrees Fahrenheit therein at a distance three feet above floor level under ordinary minimum winter conditions.
Where a gas or electric central heating system is not provided, each dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces,
chimneys, flues, or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to furnish a minimum temperature of 70
degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary minimum winter conditions.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
134/240
(f)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a safe and good working
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-133.	-	Electrical	systems.
All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed
and connected to the source of electrical power in accordance with the adopted electrical code of the city.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-134.	-	Light	and	ventilation.
Electrical lights and outlets required. Every dwelling shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every
habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least one floor or wall-type electric convenience outlet. Every kitchen,
bathroom, bedroom, corridor or hallway, and porch shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric outlet. Every
such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
Light in public halls and stairway. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five or more units shall
be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and
containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate
lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-135.	-	Exterior	and	interior	of	structures.
Foundation. The building foundation walls, piers, or other structural elements shall be maintained in a safe manner and
capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. In the case of a mobile home, the
undercarriage of the mobile home shall be completely enclosed by the foundation or stand, or by a permanent skirt if no
foundation or stand is utilized.
Exterior walls. The exterior walls shall be substantially weather tight, watertight, and shall be made impervious to the adverse
effects of weather and be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
Roofs. Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls
or interior portion of the building.
Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven
feet leading to a safe and open space at ground level.
Stairs, porches, and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto of every structure
used for human habitation shall be capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and be
maintained in sound condition and good repair.
Protective treatment. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, and basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather
tight, watertight, and rodent proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
Windows to be glazed. Windowpanes or an approved substitute shall be maintained without holes.
Window sash. Window sash shall be properly fitted and weather tight within the window frame.
Hardware. Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in good condition.
Door frames. Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from
entering the dwelling. Each door available as an exit shall be capable of being easily opened from the inside.
Interior floor, walls, and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be
placed thereon.
Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings and other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
135/240
(n)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
and sound structural condition.
Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained structurally sound and show no evidence of
deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Sec.	26-136.	-	Sanitation.
Sanitation. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling
unit, and premises thereof which such person occupies and controls or which is provided for such person's particular use.
Garbage disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of garbage and any other organic waste, which
might provide food for rodents, and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such in the garbage disposal facilities or
garbage or rubbish storage containers.
Extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents
or other pests therein or on the premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, whenever infestation is caused by failure
of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonable ratproof and insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon.
Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation
thereof.
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 2(Exh. A), 4-12-2011)
Secs.	26-137—26-140.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	V.	-	STORAGE	OF	NEW,	USED	OR	SCRAP	TIRES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 11-3, adopted April 12, 2011, amended ch. 26 by renumbering former art. VI as art. V.
Sec.	26-141.	-	Denitions.
As used in this article, "tire" means any new, used or scrap tire not attached to a vehicle, and "scrap tire" means a tire that is no longer
suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	26-142.	-	Handling	and	disposition.
The owner or occupant of any property shall be responsible for the sanitary and lawful handling and disposition of scrap tires on the
property.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	26-143.	-	Retailers,	carriers,	etc.
All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers and tire retailers shall handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions
of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. Said provisions are hereby incorporated in this section as if set out in full herein.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
(28)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
136/240
Sec.	26-144.	-	Unlawful	for	persons	in	residential	zones	to	accumulate	scrap	tires.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate any amount of scrap tires on or around property which they own
or occupy.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	26-145.	-	Unlawful	storage	for	commercial	businesses.
It shall be unlawful for any commercial business to store more than 20 tires in the open outdoors at any time, whether the tires are
stacked or otherwise. Tires in excess of 20 may be stored in not more than one enclosed van (18 wheeled trailer) or in a cage. Only one such
cage per individual or business is permitted. The cage may be portable, may not exceed eight times 12 times eight (eight feet in width, 12 feet
in depth, eight feet in height) and must be covered with a rain proof top. Storage in cages not in conformity with these guidelines is
prohibited. All tires stored outdoors shall be stored so as to prevent the holding of water that would provide temporary breeding places for
mosquitos and other disease caring organisms.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	26-146.	-	Exceptions.
An exception is made for new tires, which may be displayed on racks or stands, provided they are stored inside after business hours.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	26-147.	-	Applicability.
Nothing in this section is meant to prohibit the storage of tires indoors in a permitted enclosed building.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	26-148.	-	Unlawful	storage	in	multiple	vans	prohibited,	etc.
Storage of tires in more than one enclosed van (18 wheel trailer) is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity authorized by
this section and/or state law to handle, store and/or dispose of scrap tires, to do so in any manner except as provided in (e) above other than
the following.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
Sec.	26-149.	-	Lawful	storage.
Scrap tires may be stored outside the building of an authorized business in a container enclosed on all four sides by a solid screen and
having a secure top cover, which container is not visible from any public right-of-way or any adjoining property.
(Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 10-10-2006)
Chapter	30	-	FIRE	PREVENTION	AND	PROTECTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Buildings and building development, ch. 14.
State Law reference— Impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. §
16-10-24.1; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.;
regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-
2-40; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter
Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A.
§ 25-7-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; the Uniform Act
(29)
(29)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
137/240
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.; statewide application of Standard Fire
Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga.
Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).
Sec.	30-1.	-	Damaging	replugs.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person or persons to hit, knock down, or otherwise injure a fireplug, either from carelessness or
otherwise, and the violator shall be subject to a fine of at least the amount it will cost to replace the same as a minimum fine.
(Prior Code, § 8-2)
State law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25.
Sec.	30-2.	-	Provisions	saved	from	repeal.
Section 8-1 of the city's prior code which authorized the fire department to answer fire calls within the area served by city water, and
authorizing contracts for fire service outside the corporate limits are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a
revision of the subject matter by the city.
Chapter	31	-	FLOOD	DAMAGE	PREVENTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-3, adopted Aug. 11, 2009 did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as Ch. 31 is at the discretion
of the editor.
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Sec.	31-1.	-	Authorization.
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the
Mayor and City Council, of Unadilla, Georgia, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 1, § A), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-2.	-	Findings	of	fact.
The flood hazard areas of Unadilla Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and
protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 1, § B), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-3.	-	Statement	of	purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at
the time of initial construction;
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
(30)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
138/240
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and;
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands;
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 1, § C), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-4.	-	Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
To protect human life and health;
To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines,
streets and bridges located in floodplains;
To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a
manner as to minimize flood blight areas,
To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of
the general public;
To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and;
To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 1, § D), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-5.	-	Lands	to	which	this	chapter	applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Unadilla, Georgia.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 2, § A), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-6.	-	Basis	for	area	of	special	ood	hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated
9/11/2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of
this chapter.
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated 9/11/2009, with accompanying maps
and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for (Dooly County) are hereby adopted by reference.
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering
analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS.
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Dooly
County EMA.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 2, § B), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-7.	-	Establishment	of	development	permit.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any
development activities.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 2, § C), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-8.	-	Compliance.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
139/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 2, § D), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-9.	-	Abrogation	and	greater	restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 2, § E), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-10.	-	Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:
Considered as minimum requirements;
Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 2, § F), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-11.	-	Warning	and	disclaimer	of	liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Unadilla, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 2, § G), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-12.	-	Penalties	for	violation.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in
connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or
both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 2, § H), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-13.	-	Denitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as
garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is
connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is
separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction".
Appeal means a request for a review of the county zoning director 's interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
140/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
a.
b.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths
from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate,
and where velocity flow may be evident.
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those
designated by the local community and referenced in section 31-6.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-
A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling
or exceeding that level in any given year.
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase
the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include:
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials;
Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be
sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events;
Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or
inoperative during flood and storm events; and
Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment.
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground
level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before 7-
23-1982. [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community].
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before 7-23-1982 [the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community].
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the
boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the
areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
141/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
1.
2.
Flood insurance study is the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles
and water surface elevations of the base flood.
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard"
tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected
size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed
foundation of a building.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register:
Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district:
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations
within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
after 7-23-1982 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 7-23-1982 [the effective
date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
142/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after 7-23-1982. [the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community].
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood
modernization maps.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is:
built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main
structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a
five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of
construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be:
The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work
performed.
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building. The term does not, however, include:
Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code
enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or
Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a "historic structure".
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
143/240
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement commenced.
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this chapter.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 6), 8-11-2009)
Secs.	31-14—31-20.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	ADMINISTRATION
Sec.	31-21.	-	Designation	of	ordinance	administrator.
The mayor and city council is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 3, § A), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-22.	-	Permit	procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the county zoning, mayor and city council on forms furnished by the community
prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of
materials or equipment, and drainage facilities.
Specifically, the following information is required:
Application stage.
Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all
proposed structures;
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential
floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 31-32(2);
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed
development, and;
Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the
administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest
floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When
floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk.
The mayor and city council shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to
proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stopwork order for the project.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 3, § B), 8-11-2009)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
144/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sec.	31-23.	-	Duties	and	responsibilities	of	the	administrator.
Duties of the mayor and city council shall include, but shall not be limited to:
Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies
from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file.
Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 31-6, then the
mayor and city council shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III.
Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 31-22(2).
Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 31-22(2).
When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the mayor and city council shall obtain certification of design criteria from a
registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 31-22(1)c. and subsection 31-32(2) or
subsection 31-34(2).
Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in
flood hazard areas.
Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure
accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any
altered or relocated watercourse is maintained.
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the mayor and city council
shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter.
All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the mayor and city council and
shall be open for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 3, § C), 8-11-2009)
Secs.	31-24—31-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	PROVISIONS	FOR	FLOOD	HAZARD	REDUCTION
Sec.	31-31.	-	General	standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure;
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage;
New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
145/240
(4)
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
c.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
a.
(2)
Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed a
below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood re
enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automat
of floodwater.
Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet
the following minimum criteria:
Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and,
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit
the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction.
So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or
entry to the elevated area, and
The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to
and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the system;
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding, and;
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this
chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 4, § A), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-32.	-	Specic	standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction
and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls
shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 31-31(4).
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation,
plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation.
Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE,
or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide
such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 31-23(6).
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
146/240
(3)
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
b.
1.
2.
c.
d.
1.
2.
3.
(4)
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available:
All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on:
Individual lots or parcels;
In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or
On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred
"substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no
lower than one foot above the base flood elevation.
Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
may be elevated so that either:
The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base
flood elevation, or
The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements
of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade.
All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Reference subsection 31-31(6) above).
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days.
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on
its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices,
and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or
The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and
elevation requirements of subsections a—c., above.
Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 31-6, are areas designated as floodway. A
floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the
area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood
heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other
development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A
registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof.
Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with
all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article III.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 4, § B), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-33.	-	Building	standards	for	streams	without	established	base	ood	elevations	and/or	oodway	(A-zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 31-6, where streams exist but no base flood data have been
provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply:
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 31-6, then the
county zoning director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III only if
data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply:
No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream
or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
147/240
(3)
a.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of
existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than
three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot
above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of
subsection 31-31(4).
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation,
plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at
the building site.
The county zoning director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the
permit file.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 4, § C), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-34.	-	Standards	for	areas	of	special	ood	hazard	(zones	AE)	with	established	base	ood	elevations	without	designated	oodways.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 31-6, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but
no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply:
No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of
special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The
engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering
principles.
New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in
accordance with section 31-32
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 4, § D), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-35.	-	Standards	for	areas	of	shallow	ooding	(AO	zones).
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 31-6, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base
flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply:
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above
the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated
at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood
waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 31-31(4).
The county zoning director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of
the permit file.
New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation.
The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified
FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to
the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 31-22(1)c. and 31-22(2).
Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
148/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
a.
b.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 4, § E), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-36.	-	Standards	for	subdivisions.
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards,
and;
For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be
provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any
changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon
completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final
LOMR.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 4, § F), 8-11-2009)
Sec.	31-37.	-	Standards	for	critical	facilities.
Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain.
All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 4, § G), 8-11-2009)
Secs.	31-38—31-40.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	IV.	-	VARIANCE	PROCEDURES
Sec.	31-41.	-	Variances.
The planning and zoning board as established by mayor and city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance
from the requirements of this chapter.
The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by
the county zoning director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning board may appeal such decision to the county superior court,
as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair
or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of
this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood
damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all
standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter.
Conditions for variances:
A variance shall be issued only when there is:
A finding of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
149/240
c.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(i)
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public sa
public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ord
The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the
standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the
building.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base
flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
The county zoning director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the planning and zoning board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2009-3, (Art. 5), 8-11-2009)
Chapter	34	-	HEALTH	AND	SANITATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building development, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 66.
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of
health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and
regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4); power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6;
authority to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3).
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Secs.	34-1—34-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	WELLS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Waterwell Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.
DIVISION	1.	-	GENERALLY
Sec.	34-31.	-	Open,	dangerous	well;	nuisance.
The owners of all open and dangerous wells in the city must close in, cover, or otherwise abate said nuisance. Upon failure to do so, such
nuisance shall be abated by authority of the mayor and council, and the cost of abating same collected from the owner as provided in section
26-101(2).
(Prior Code, § 9-4)
Sec.	34-32.	-	Wells	on	improved	property	prohibited.
No person, firm, or corporation shall dig or cause to be dug any well within the corporate limits of the city on improved property abutting
any water line; provided, however, that wells shall be permitted on improved property of one acre or more in size for agricultural or garden
use only.
(31)
(31)
(32)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
150/240
(1)
(2)
(Prior Code, § 18-20)
Sec.	34-33.	-	Application	for	well	permit	on	unimproved	property	and	improved	property	of	one	acre	or	more.
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to dig a well on unimproved property or improved property of one acre or more in size where
the well is for agricultural or garden use only within the corporate limits of the city shall first apply in writing to the mayor and council, setting
forth in the application information concerning the location of the proposed well, anticipated depth of the proposed well, and the proposed
uses of the well. No person, firm, or corporation shall dig nor shall such person, firm or corporation hire, employ, or contract with another to
dig a well within the corporate limits of the city without a well permit from the mayor and council as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 18-21)
Sec.	34-34.	-	Existing	wells.
Any person, firm, or corporation operating an existing well on improved property abutting a water line within the corporate limits of the
city shall be permitted to continue operating the well for agricultural and garden use only.
(Prior Code, § 18-22)
Sec.	34-35.	-	Penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in
section 1-12.
(Prior Code, § 18-23)
Secs.	34-36—34-50.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	2.	-	WELLHEAD	PROTECTION
Sec.	34-51.	-	Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city and its residents by the
establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for any public water system,
as herein defined, located within the corporate limits of the city, and by the use of permits to require safe conditions to be maintained within
such zones.
(Prior Code, § 18-30)
Sec.	34-52.	-	Denitions.
When used in this division the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section:
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources or its successor.
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating
reversible illness; or
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Public water system means any system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, whether publicly owned
and operated or privately owned or operated, if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals.
The term "public water system," includes, but is not limited to, any collection, treatment, storage, or distribution facilities under the control of
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
151/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
the operator of such system and used primarily in connection with such system and any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not
under such control which are used primarily in connection with such system.
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by
placing dirt cover thereon.
Supplier means the owner and/or operator of a public water system.
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adaptors, ports, seals, valves, and other attachments.
(Prior Code, § 18-31)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	34-53.	-	Wellhead	protection	plan.
Each supplier, as herein defined, other than a supplier from a publicly owned or operated system, shall file with the city a wellhead
protection plan prepared by or approved by the division for every well, well field, or spring which is used to supply water to a public water
system. Suppliers from publicly owned or operated systems shall adopt such a plan. Suppliers from systems in existence at the time of the
adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall file or adopt such plan within 45 days after adoption of such ordinance.
Suppliers from systems to be constructed in the future shall file or adopt such plan, and suppliers from privately owned or operated systems
shall obtain approval from the city, prior to constructing or operating any well or spring serving such system. Upon approval of the plan by
the mayor and council, the city shall issue a permit for the construction and operation or continued operation of same. No permit shall be
required for suppliers from publicly owned or operated systems.
(Prior Code, § 18-32)
Sec.	34-54.	-	Components	of	wellhead	protection	plans.
Wellhead protection plans shall consist of five parts:
An identification and location of a control zone for each well or spring;
An identification and location of each required management zone for each well or spring;
An inventory of potential pollution sources in the designated wellhead protection areas;
A management plan for potential pollution sources identified in the inventory; and
The contingency plan, if any, submitted by the supplier to the division describing how alternate water supplies will be
provided in case the well or wells in question become polluted.
(Prior Code, § 18-33)
Sec.	34-55.	-	Control	zone.
All wells used as a source of supply for a public water system shall have a control zone, which shall be the area within a circle extending
outward from the center of the borehole a distance of 25 feet for pervious surface materials, or 15 feet for impervious surface materials, such
as concrete. Only those chemicals used for water treatment shall be stored in the control zone. Motor fuels, oil, motor vehicles, or portable
equipment powered by an internal combustion engine shall not be stored in the control zone. For all new wells, on-site fuel storage for
auxiliary power shall have a spill containment system for the entire volume of fuel. Existing wells shall retrofit a spill containment system or
monitor auxiliary power fuel storage. Chemicals or motorized vehicles may be used in the control zone for maintenance of the well, well
house, wellpump, or associated plumbing. The control zone shall be protected by a chainlink fence, or equivalent, having a minimum height
of seven feet, and constructed along the outer perimeter of the control zone. Access to the control zone shall be only through a locking gate,
or equivalent.
(Prior Code, § 18-34)
Sec.	34-56.	-	management	zones.
Wells drawing water only from confined aquifers. Wells drawing water only from confined aquifers, as determined by the
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
152/240
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(b)
division, shall have an inner management zone extending outward from the center of the borehole for a radius of 100 feet. No
outer management zone is required for such wells.
Wells drawing water from unconfined aquifers and/or from springs, except those lying in areas of karst. Wells drawing water
from unconfined aquifers and/or from springs, except those lying in areas of karst, as determined by the division, shall have an
inner management zone extending outward from the center of the borehole or spring head for a radius of 250 feet.
Wells drawing water from unconfined aquifers and/or springs identified as being in areas of karst. Wells drawing water from
unconfined aquifers and/or springs which the division has identified as being in areas of karst, shall have an inner
management zone extending outward from the center of the borehole or spring head for a radius of 500 feet.
Unconfined wells utilize fractured crystalline rock aquifers. Unconfined wells which the division has determined utilize
fractured crystalline rock aquifers shall have an outer management zone determined according to the "health method curve"
contained in the EPA approved state wellhead protection plan.
Unconfined aquifer wells lying in karst regions and all springs. Unconfined aquifer wells determined by the division as lying in
karst regions and all springs shall have an outer management zone determined by hydrogeologic mapping.
Other wells. Other wells not meeting the above criteria shall have their outer management zones determined by time of travel
calculations (a minimum of five-year time of travel) or by volumetric calculations approved by the division.
(Prior Code, § 18-35)
Sec.	34-57.	-	Inventory	of	potential	pollution	sources.
Prior to the issuance by the city of a permit where required by this division, the supplier shall file with the mayor a copy of the inventory
of potential pollution sources within the control zone and the management zone, prepared by the division in compliance with 391-3-5.40(7),
Georgia EPD Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 18-36)
Sec.	34-58.	-	Inner	and	outer	management	zones	for	new	wells	or	springs.
For new wells or springs that are to be used as a source of water supply for public water systems, the following shall apply:
The city shall not issue any permit for the construction or the addition of a new well or spring until the supplier thereof
has complied with the provisions of this division respecting a wellhead protection plan.
In addition to the wellhead protection plan, the supplier shall provide the city with the exact location, intended aquifer,
projected depth, and expected production of the planned well or wells and spring or springs.
(Prior Code, § 18-37)
Sec.	34-59.	-	Permit	issuance.
Presence of potential pollution sources. The city shall not issue any permit for the construction and/or development of any
well or spring, nor shall any supplier from a publicly owned or operated system construct or operate any well or spring, where
the following potential pollution sources are known to be present within the inner management zone:
Underground storage tanks;
Nondomestic septic tanks with drain fills;
Animal feedlots;
Poultry enclosures; or
Animal enclosures.
Application to family pets. This rule shall not be construed to apply to family pets or environmental facilities permitted by the
division or other potential pollution sources identified in the inventory if the city engineer has determined that there will be no
releases to the ground or that all releases will be to a sanitary sewer or that such releases, if they occur, will not be a threat to
public health and safety. This rule shall apply to domestic septic tanks with drain fills should it be determined that releases
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
153/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
from the domestic septic tank would be a threat to public health and safety; provided, however, the city engineer may issue a
permit following modifications of the well design, including the depth of the well that would protect the public health and
safety.
(Prior Code, § 18-38)
Sec.	34-60.	-	Permit	revocation.
If, after the issuance of any permit required by this division, whether for an existing well or spring or a new well or spring, any change
occurs within the portion of any of the required zones which are owned or controlled by the supplier, which change creates or permits a
condition which would have authorized denial of a permit for a newly constructed well, the permit may be revoked by the city after notice to
the supplier and an opportunity to be heard.
(Prior Code, § 18-39)
Sec.	34-61.	-	Grounds	and	procedures	for	variance.
The city shall have the power in individual cases of unnecessary hardship to grant variances from the terms of this division where the
same will not be contrary to the statutes and regulations of the United States and/or the state, or to the public interest, and which will
preserve and be consistent with public safety and welfare. Such variances may be granted upon findings that:
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular wellhead in question because of its
location or topography;
The strict application of the provisions of this division to this particular wellhead would create an unnecessary hardship;
The conditions are peculiar to the particular wellhead involved; and
Variances, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this
division.
(Prior Code, § 18-40)
Sec.	34-62.	-	Penalties.
Failure to obtain permit. It shall be unlawful to construct or operate any new system or any new well or spring in any existing
system without first obtaining from the city the permit required by this ordinance. The failure to obtain such permit prior to
construction and/or operation shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12
Nuisance abatement. The construction and/or operation of any such system, well, or spring is hereby declared to be contrary
to public health, welfare, and safety and a nuisance subject to abatement by the city.
(Prior Code, § 18-41)
Chapter	38	-	LAW	ENFORCEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62.
State Law reference— Law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day and police week, O.C.G.A. §
1-4-7; Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20;
special police, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1 et seq.; compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9;
municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer for purpose of state traffic laws,
O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(46); fleeing or attempting to elude police officers, impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395; tort liability
for false arrest, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-1 et seq.; tort liability for false imprisonment, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-20 et seq.; tort liability for malicious prosecution,
O.C.G.A. § 51-7-40; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1).
Sec.	38-1.	-	Chief	of	police—Appointment;	duties.
(33)
(33)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
154/240
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Appointment; powers. The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the council, and
the chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and council. In the
his duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the member
employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state.
Duties. The chief of police of the city shall have the following duties:
To attend all meetings of the mayor and council when requested and all trials before the municipal court;
To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments and rules of the mayor and
council;
To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the municipal court;
To see that the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced;
To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof;
To protect the rights of persons and property;
To oversee the conduct of the officers and men of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct
and for the general good order of the police department;
Manage and maintain the city police station and keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the
department including a log of all questions, activities and investigations;
To submit a monthly report to the mayor and council outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the
number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases
reported by each police officer; and
To discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the mayor or council.
(Prior Code, § 12-6)
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq.
Sec.	38-2.	-	Same—Resignation,	removal,	death,	or	disability.
In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the chief of police, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of said chief
until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed.
(Prior Code, § 12-7)
Sec.	38-3.	-	Record	of	arrests	required;	report	by	chief	to	mayor;	record	kept	by	city	clerk.
When a police officer makes an arrest he shall make a record thereof and report the same to the chief of police. The chief of police shall
furnish copies of all summonses to the mayor, who shall be responsible for entering cases on the docket of the municipal court. It shall be the
duty of the city clerk to keep accurate records showing the date of trial and the disposition of all cases.
(Prior Code, § 12-15)
Sec.	38-4.	-	Improperly	releasing	prisoners.
After the police make an arrest and the defendant is placed in jail, it shall be unlawful and punishable by a fine as a contempt of the
municipal court for the police or any official of the city to release or attempt to have released said prisoner without having brought the
prisoner before the city's court for proper action or post a bond with security to insure his or her appearance. Otherwise, no prisoners shall
be released from jail or the case dismissed by the police except on the express order of the presiding official of the municipal court or a
prosecutor in the municipal court appointed by the presiding official of the municipal court.
(Ord. No. 2005-3, 5-24-2005)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 2005-3, adopted May 24, 2005 amended this Code by adding provisions designated as § 38-3. Inasmuch as there were provisions so
designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 38-4 at the discretion of the editor.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
155/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(b)
Chapter	42	-	OFFENSES	AND	MISCELLANEOUS	PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 62.
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with
respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2).
Sec.	42-1.	-	Loitering.
Prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful for any person after having been directed by an officer or member of the police
department to move away therefrom, to remain or loiter in front of any public place, or to loiter or idle away time around the
motels or on the sidewalks or public streets or roads of the city.
Loitering offense defined. A person commits the offense of loitering when the person is in a place at a time or in a manner not
usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern
for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity.
Procedure. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to
conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement
officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or
immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence
and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with
the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the
alarm or immediate concern.
(Ord. No. 2001-2, § 11-26(1))
State law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36.
Sec.	42-2.	-	Midnight	curfew.
Generally. It shall be unlawful for any minor 17 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon or be upon
public streets, sidewalks, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings,
places of amusement, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult over the age of 18 years having lawful parental
authority over such minor or an adult who is the lawful guardian of such minor, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any
day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following
instances:
When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the
minor;
When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult having lawful care
and custody of such minor;
When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity or entertainment, and school sponsored or school
related events, including recreational activities or dances;
When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above
referenced places during the prescribed period of time;
When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from any activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights
of speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion;
When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent, or the consent of a lawful guardian for normal interstate
travel through the city; and
When the minor is on the property of the building in which he resides.
Responsibility of parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody and control of any child
(34)
(34)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
156/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
17 years of age or younger to permit or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in or upon public streets or any other
places listed in subsection (a) of this section within the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 5:00 a.m. of
the following day except in circumstances set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(7) of this section. Upon conviction of
violating this section for the first time, the person shall be subject to such punishment as the municipal court of the city sees fit
as in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2003-2, § 11-26(2), 8-12-2003)
Sec.	42-3.	-	Damaging,	defacing	park	property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the walks laid out in any public park and trespass upon the grass, to deface any of the seats,
fountains, or other property therein, to cut or whittle thereon with a knife or other instrument, to write or mark thereon with a pen, pencil, or
other instrument, or to cut or injure any of the shade trees in said park.
(Prior Code, § 11-2)
Sec.	42-4.	-	Damaging,	defacing	public	property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, break, or destroy any of the property of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-3)
Sec.	42-5.	-	Damaging,	interfering	with	poles,	wires,	other	xtures.
It shall be unlawful to cut, break, or in any other manner molest or interfere with any telegraph, telephone, electric light, or other pole
used for the support of electric wires, or to throw at, break, injure, or in any other manner molest or interfere with any fixture, wire, lamp, or
other thing placed thereon, or to tie any horse, mule, or other animal of any sort to any such pole.
(Prior Code, § 11-4)
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 66.
Sec.	42-6.	-	Disorderly	conduct;	acts	constituting.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the
peace and repose of the citizens of the city. The following provisions are hereby declared to constitute acts of disorderly conduct:
It shall be disorderly conduct to be found drunk making any unnecessary or unusual noise to the disturbance of any
citizen.
It shall be disorderly conduct for any person to act indecent in any car or vehicle parked or not parked within the city.
It shall be disorderly conduct to use violent, boisterous, profane, or obscene language in public places, use opprobrious
words to another or in the presence of another, without provocation.
An assault or assault and battery shall constitute disorderly conduct.
The making of unnecessary loud noises by the loud and unnecessary blowing of automobile horns, the discharge of
firearms, or otherwise disturbing the peace and good order shall be disorderly conduct.
The willful giving of false alarms of fire or false alarms of any kind shall constitute disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, § 11-5)
Sec.	42-7.	-	Discharging	rearms;	air	guns,	etc.
Prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, air gun, or other such weapon
projecting lead or any other missile within 300 yards of any street, alley, or building, or at any point upon the land of another
person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
Application to law officers. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm
when lawfully defending person or property.
(Prior Code, § 11-6)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
157/240
State law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another,
§ 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105.
Sec.	42-8.	-	Muer	required,	noise	producing	devices	on	vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the city without said vehicle being equipped with a muffler which emits no offensive
noise, or to operate a motor vehicle equipped with mufflers commonly known as smitties, clear or gutted mufflers, or exhaust systems
equipped with cutouts, or with noise making devices attached to the tailpipe, such as spark plugs or inner tubes or any other noise making
device.
(Prior Code, § 11-7)
Cross reference— Noise, § 26-71 et seq.
Sec.	42-9.	-	Posting	signs	on	posts,	trees,	poles.
It shall be unlawful to tack, nail, or otherwise place any signs on posts, trees, or poles of the city without permission of the mayor and
council.
(Prior Code, § 11-9)
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 46.
Sec.	42-10.	-	Public	address	systems;	permission	required.
It shall be unlawful to operate or use a public address system upon the streets of the city, or within the corporate limits of the city, upon
either public or private property, without the written permission of the mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 11-10)
State law reference— Control of mass gatherings, O.C.G.A. § 31-27-1 et seq.
Sec.	42-11.	-	Throwing	stones,	other	missiles.
No person or persons shall pitch, throw, or cast any stone or missile at or upon any house, window, lamp, electric light, telephone poles
or fixtures, or shade trees in the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-12)
Sec.	42-12.	-	Penalty.
Any person convicted of violating a provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-12.
Chapter	46	-	SIGNS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Buildings and building development, ch. 14; posting signs on posts, trees, poles, § 42-9; streets, sidewalks and other
public places, ch. 54; zoning, app. A; sign regulations, app. A, art. VII.
State Law reference— Prohibited placement of campaign posters, signs and advertisements, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1; signs used by retail
distilled spirits dealers, signs advertising Georgia lottery, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; unlawful
placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; outdoor advertising near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Secs.	46-1—46-30.	-	Reserved.
(35)
(35)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
158/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
ARTICLE	II.	-	INTERSTATE	HIGHWAY	SIGNS
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— City Business Improvement District Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.
Sec.	46-31.	-	General	sign	provisions.
This article shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs abutting or visible from the Interstate 75 right-of-way in the corporate limits of the
city.
No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article.
Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated.
All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the Interstate 75 right-of-way shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70, et
seq., (The Georgia Outdoor Advertising Code) and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a
permit under said code. In instances where the sign controls of this article are more strict, these regulations shall apply.
Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product, or service which has ceased operation or production shall be
removed within six months of the discontinuance of said activity, business, product, or service.
(Prior Code, § 11-22)
Sec.	46-32.	-	Prohibited	signs.
Signs imitating warning signals. Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the
flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the
words, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of the governmental traffic signs.
Signs in streets or highway rights-of-way. No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public
agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way.
Signs painted or attached to natural features. Signs painted or attached to natural features, such as trees or rocks, telephone
poles, utility poles, or fence posts, are prohibited.
Fluttering ribbons and banners. Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited.
Signs near historical sites or monuments. Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except
signs pertaining to that particular site or monument, are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 11-23)
Sec.	46-33.	-	Regulations	for	specic	types	of	signs.
Home occupation signs. One nonilluminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area is
permitted.
Signs of work under construction. One nonilluminated sign not exceeding 40 square feet in area displaying the name of the
building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, the financial, selling, and development agencies is
permitted upon the premises of any work under the construction, alterations, or removal. Such signs shall be removed from
the site within 30 days after the completion of the project.
Temporary subdivision signs. Temporary signs, not exceeding 40 square feet in an area announcing a land subdivision
development, are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart.
Such signs shall be removed when 75 percent of the lots are conveyed.
Roof signs. Not more than one roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. No roof sign structure shall
extend more than 25 feet above the elevation of the roof.
Wall signs. Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs, and projecting
signs) shall meet the following requirements:
Signs on the front surface of a building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed
(36)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
159/240
(2)
(3)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(h)
(i)
25 percent of the front surface of the building.
Signs on the side and rear surface of a building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of a building shall not
exceed 50 percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building, respectively.
Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than 24 inches from the wall. Signs attached
at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five feet.
Illuminated signs. Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast
into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district, or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver.
Outdoor advertising signs. Such signs shall meet the following requirements:
Uniform size. The outside measurements of all such signs shall be 12 feet in height and 50 feet in length, with or without
trim, or such other measurements as approved by the state department of transportation.
Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by
photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including, but not limited to, neon, animation, and running lights, is prohibited.
Height above interstate grade. All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring
from the lower portion of the sign face. Signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Two signs in the same location (back to
back or "V" formation) shall be in the same height above the interstate's surface.
Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited.
Number of signs per location. Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back to
back and "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side by side) facing the same direction.
Spacing. Sign locations shall be no less than 500 feet apart measuring from the two closest points.
Interchange adjacent to the interstate highway. Allow three outdoor advertising signs per quadrant of any interchange
adjacent to the interstate highway. These signs must be within commercially or industrially zoned areas as specified in
state law and are restricted to an area 1,200 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on
the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp.
Marsh and historic area location prohibited. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland area or an
area of designated historic interest.
On premises signs. On premises signs located within 100 feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and
located on the same property and for sale or for lease signs located on the property being advertised would not be prohibited.
Nonconforming signs. Any legally erected sign which would become nonconforming as a result of this article would be allowed
to remain until purchased by the state department of transportation or the city, provided that the sign owner meets the
requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such signs.
(Prior Code, § 11-24)
Sec.	46-34.	-	Violations.
Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this article, a fine may be levied by the city not to exceed $300.00 for each violation.
Each day that a violation continues shall be considered to be a separate and distinct violation.
(Prior Code, § 11-25)
Chapter	50	-	SOLID	WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Any ordinance adopting a comprehensive solid waste management plan and shortterm work update saved from
repeal, § 1-11(18); dead animals, § 10-7; buildings and building development, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 34;
utilities, ch. 66.
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and
regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions,
O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.;
transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-
(37)
(37)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
160/240
(a)
(b)
249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean
and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide
garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2).
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Sec.	50-1.	-	Comprehensive	solid	waste	management	plan	adopted.
The Dooly County Solid Waste Management Plan is adopted in accordance with the Georgia Solid Waste Management Act of 1990 as set
forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.
State law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional
solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1.
Sec.	50-2.	-	Submission	of	update	authorized.
The mayor and council hereby authorize submission of the current draft version of the proposed update/amendment to the
comprehensive solid waste management plan to the Middle Flint Regional Development Center for the mandated regional and state level
review.
(Res. of 11-10-1998)
Secs.	50-3—50-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	COLLECTION	AND	DISPOSAL
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— The city has contracted with Dooly County, Georgia, for the collection and disposal of solid waste in the city.
Sec.	50-31.	-	Purpose;	denitions.
Purpose. The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this article is to provide for the protection of the public health
by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation and disposal of residential and industrial solid waste
generated within the corporate limits of the city.
Definitions. For the purpose of these regulations, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this article as follows:
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
Hazardous waste means material in a solid or semisolid state resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides or drugs (other than
normal household use), pathological wastes, chemical wastes, flammable or explosive materials, and similar waste material in a solid or
semisolid state, that the city may consider a likely hazard to the public health poor safety, except radioactive waste materials, as provided in
Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-1-1, entitled "Radioactive Materials."
Industrial waste or industrial sold waste means the solid waste materials from factories, processing plants and manufacturing
enterprises, and includes food processing wastes, meat and poultry processing waste, condemned food, ashes and cinders from power
plants, agriculture products waste, land clearance waste and similar waste.
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or to
otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance.
Premises means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored.
(38)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
161/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Included are kitchen wastes, manure, offal,
hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage.
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan.
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition
derived from places of residence, commercial areas and institutions and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, tree and yard
trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, minerals, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, bedding, rubber, discarded clothing and similar
materials.
Sanitary land filling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover
thereon.
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials.
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons,
boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, dunnage, ashes, street refuse, dead
animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction
wastes, and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state, not otherwise described.
Waste means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste.
(Prior Code, § 13-1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	50-32.	-	Placement	for	collection;	frequency;	limitations.
Placement generally. All refuse, ashes, garbage and trash shall be placed in the polycart for collection. The polycart shall be
placed at the street-side for collection purposes.
Collection schedule. The collection schedule shall be announced by the mayor and council for the city. If the polycart is not
near the street-side at collection time, this will indicate no service is needed.
Collection for physically incapacitated persons. Any person physically incapacitated so as to prevent such person from placing
the polycart at street-side for collection purposes may obtain non-street-side collection by obtaining the approval of the mayor
and council.
Prohibited wastes. Industrial waste, large animals over 30 pounds, or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping or
processing operations will not be collected, transported or disposed of by the city but such waste collection, transportation
and disposal shall be by the owners and/or generators of such waste or animals.
(Prior Code, § 13-3)
Sec.	50-33.	-	Charges	for	collection	and	disposal.
Determination of monthly charges. Monthly charges for collection and disposal of solid waste in the city shall be as
determined from time to time by the mayor and council.
Volume survey. For the purpose of determining the initial classification of establishments as to volumes of waste generated,
the head of the department of streets and sanitation may make a volume survey of all establishments in the city to be served
by public collection facilities. Said department head shall observe each establishment for a period not less than one week and
the result of such survey and the classification established thereby shall be given in writing to each establishment and subject
to the final approval of the mayor and council. Similar surveys shall be made semiannually to determine whether changes
should be made in classification and upon request of the owner of any establishment who feels his establishment is in an
improper category, provided not more than two such surveys per year may be so requested.
When charges due. Charges for solid waste collection and disposal service shall become due on the date specified by the
mayor and council and shall be payable by the owner or occupant at the office of the city clerk. Bills for the city garbage service
shall be rendered along with the bills for other utility services as set out in section 66-10 of this Code and failure to make
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
162/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
timely payment shall result in the penalties or termination or both as set out in that section. If garbage service is terminated,
the polycart shall be picked up by the city and the owner or occupant shall purchase a polycart from the city if his service is
continued in the future.
(Prior Code, § 13-4)
Sec.	50-34.	-	Preparation	and	storage	of	garbage	prior	to	collection.
Drainage of excess liquid; weight limitation. Garbage and rubbish shall be drained of excess liquid before being placed for
collection. Rubbish may be placed in containers not over 50 pounds gross weight when placed for collection or in bundles not
over 50 pounds each. Limbs or cuttings shall be not over four feet in length and four inches in diameter. Larger items in size or
weight may be handled as special fees to be determined by the city.
Placement of solid waste in stream, lake or body of water; unauthorized accumulations. No person shall place any solid waste
in any stream, lake, or other body of water. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of sold waste within such reasonable time as
may be fixed by written notice of the mayor and council shall be deemed a violation of these regulations.
Manner of collection. Solid waste to be collected by the city or its representative shall be for collection on the curb or beside
the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning the same, or if the property abuts on an alley, at the rear of the
property, but not in the gutter nor in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The
owner/occupant may place tree limbs, branches, tree cuttings and vines in designated areas indicated above for collection on
Thursday of each week. Such tree limbs, branches tree cuttings and vines shall be no longer than four feet, no more than 4" in
diameter and no more than 50 pounds in weight. The department of public works shall not collect trimmings where trees are
trimmed or cut for compensation whether the compensation be in cash or in the wood from the trees trimmed or cut except
in the case of a natural disaster.
Refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, furniture and similar items will be collected only by appointment made with the
department of public works. Collection shall be made at the property line or alley as indicated in subsection (c) above and such
items shall be placed at the designated areas no sooner than 24 hours prior to the appointed time of collection. The occupant
of the premises shall be responsible to see that locks or doors of refrigerators, iceboxes or containers are removed.
The city will charge a $10.00 trash disposal fee for each trip/load the public works truck makes from owners/occupants
property. This includes all items in subsections (c) and (d) above.
(Prior Code, § 13-5)
Sec.	50-35.	-	Scavenging	of	containers.
No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the city, or any employee of person holding a contract with the city
for collection of solid waste shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or
take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where same shall have been placed by the owner thereof.
(Prior Code, § 13-6)
Sec.	50-36.	-	Solid	waste	classied	for	disposal.
Only the following classes of solid waste shall be acceptable for collection by the city:
Acceptable solid waste.
Garbage, as defined in section 50-31
Ashes, the residue from burning of combustible materials for fuel.
Rubbish, as defined in section 50-31. Provided however rubbish will be collected only by appointment with the
Department of Public Works, City of Unadilla. Collections shall be made at the location designated in subsection 50-
34(c) above and such items shall be placed at the designated areas no sooner than 24 hours prior to the appointed
time of collection. The occupant of the premises shall be responsible to see that locks or doors of refrigerators,
iceboxes or containers are removed.
Small dead animals, not over 30 pounds in weight, if kept separate from garbage and rubbish, will be collected
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
163/240
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
without charge, provided that charge will be made for all such animals collected from animal hospitals, kennels, pet
shops and the like. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal.
Unacceptable solid waste. The following classes of solid wastes shall not be acceptable for collection by the city:
Building waste, large quantities of materials resulting from the construction or demolition of building, such as
plaster, mortar, broken masonry, scrap lumber, roofing or similar materials.
Hazardous waste as defined in section 50-31 and large dead animals over 30 pounds.
Industrial solid waste as defined in section 50-31
(Prior Code, § 13-7; Ord. No. 2005-07, § 1, 11-12-2005)
Sec.	50-37.	-	Enforcement.
The head of the department of streets and sanitation shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. In the
exercise of his solid waste management duties, said department head shall:
Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of
personnel;
Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this article;
Supervise the operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfill and/or other disposal sites or facilities;
Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and solid waste disposal systems to
ensure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(Prior Code, § 13-8)
Sec.	50-38.	-	Limitations	of	authority.
All regulatory actions of the head of the department of streets and sanitation shall be subject to the review of the mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 13-9)
Sec.	50-39.	-	Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by, the head of the department of streets and sanitation shall have the right
to appeal to the mayor and council, which body may, upon hearing, confirm, modify or revoke such requirement or fee.
(Prior Code, § 13-10)
Sec.	50-40.	-	Penalties.
Notice for correction. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article shall be served by the city with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
Continuing violations. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article or who shall continue any violation hereof
beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-
12
(Prior Code, § 13-11)
Secs.	50-41—50-70.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	YARD	TRIMMINGS	DISPOSAL
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Yard trimmings disposal restrictions, § 12-8-40.2.
(39)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
164/240
(a)
(b)
Sec.	50-71.	-	Denitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other
nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes.
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus.
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the
soils surrounding the landfill.
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and
includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day
use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste
from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations.
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste
occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste
landfills.
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or
including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges, or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means
of placing an approved cover thereon.
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse
vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural, and
silvicultural operations.
(Prior Code, § 13-30)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	50-72.	-	Placement	and	disposal	of	yard	trimmings;	prohibitions.
Mixing yard trimmings with municipal solid waste prohibited. It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with
municipal solid waste within the city.
Disposal of yard trimmings at certain disposal facilities prohibited. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal
solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-31)
Sec.	50-73.	-	Placement,	preparation	and	collection.
Tree limbs, branches, tree cuttings and vines shall be placed as outlined in subsection 50-35(c) above and collected on Thursday of each
week. Such tree limbs, branches, tree cuttings and vines shall be no longer that four feet, no more than four inches in diameter and no more
than 50 pounds in weight. The department of public works shall not collect tree limbs, branches or trimmings where trees are trimmed or cut
for compensation whether the compensation is in cash or in the wood from the trees trimmed or cut except in the case of a natural disaster.
(Prior Code, § 13-32; Ord. No. 2005-07, § 2, 11-12-2005)
Sec.	50-74.	-	Penalties.
Any person violating this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-12.
(Prior Code, § 13-33)
Chapter	54	-	STREETS,	SIDEWALKS	AND	OTHER	PUBLIC	PLACES
FOOTNOTE(S):
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
165/240
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public
way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements
saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(15); buildings and
building development, ch. 14; transient merchants, § 18-71 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 22; environment, ch. 26; signs, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles,
ch. 62; utilities, ch. 66; zoning, app. A.
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities,
O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or
maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal
street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and
use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. §
36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements,
O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358;
authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX,
§ II, ¶ III(a)(4).
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Sec.	54-1.	-	Maintenance	and	repair	of	public	streets.
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the head of
the department of streets and sanitation who shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this Code and all ordinances of the
city relating to such public ways.
(Prior Code, § 16-1)
Sec.	54-2.	-	Defacing	sidewalks,	streets,	and	curbs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for
commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly-laid street, sidewalk, or curbing
pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricaded or is soft or newly-laid.
(Prior Code, § 16-2)
Sec.	54-3.	-	Deposits	onto	streets	and	sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or
any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal, or property.
(Prior Code, § 16-3)
Sec.	54-4.	-	Obstructing	streets,	sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to convert to personal use any public street, sidewalk, or alley in the city or place any
obstruction in or upon them, such as wood, barrels, and boxes, merchandise, timber or lumber, except necessarily for building purposes, and
such obstruction shall be moved by the policy or the street department at the expense of the owner thereof or the person causing said
obstruction.
(Prior Code, § 16-4)
Sec.	54-5.	-	Obstruction	to	vision	at	intersection.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any lot, parcel, or piece of land within the city to allow any obstruction to vision
in the triangle formed by the lines of two intersecting streets, or a street and any alley, and a line joining points of such lines 25 feet distant
from their point of intersection by permitting any vegetation to grow or be maintained between the heights of three feet and ten feet above
(40)
(40)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
166/240
(a)
(b)
the grade of the centerline of the intersection, or by constructing or maintaining any fence or other structure which constitutes an
obstruction to view within the triangle.
(Prior Code, § 16-5)
Sec.	54-6.	-	Street	name	signs—Changing	without	authority.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any sign designating a street, avenue, or other public place by a
different name than that by which it is generally and legally known, or to refuse to remove the same from their property when requested to
do so by an officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-6)
Sec.	54-7.	-	Same—Injuring	or	removing.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to injure, deface, or remove any of the street signs posted at or near the corner
of the streets in the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-7)
Sec.	54-8.	-	Maintenance	of	property	between	sidewalks	and	streets.
All persons who own real estate in the city, whose real estate abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved, shall be required to keep that
portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts,
in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation which would mar or detract from
the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the
portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the street as aforesaid, and upon which said real estate abuts,
shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this
section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same.
(Prior Code, § 16-8)
Sec.	54-9.	-	Trees	and	shrubs.
Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure, or cut any tree, bush, or shrub in or from any
public street, parkway, or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk in the manner
specified in this chapter.
Dangerous trees. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or other public place in the city in such a way as to
impede or interfere with traffic or travel, shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so
that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place
shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. The city through its authorized
representative may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to
traffic or passage shall be removed.
(Prior Code, § 16-9)
Sec.	54-10.	-	Encroachments.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or
to erect any poles or wires, or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley, or other public way without having first secured
a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-10)
Sec.	54-11.	-	Report	of	defects,	obstructions,	deposits,	and	discharges.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
167/240
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
It shall be the duty of every city official and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction or of any unlawful deposit or
discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or other public way of the city, to report the same to the head of the department of
streets and sanitation as soon as possible.
(Prior Code, § 16-11)
Sec.	54-12.	-	Provisions	saved	from	repeal.
Section 17-3 of the city's prior code relating to permits for parades and processions is not repealed and shall continue in full force and
effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city.
State law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or
assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles
in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7.
Secs.	54-13—54-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	STREET	CONSTRUCTION	AND	IMPROVEMENTS
Sec.	54-31.	-	Street	improvements.
Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the mayor and council, a resolution stating the
nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the
newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands
abutting on the proposed improvement do not within 15 days after the last day of publication of said resolution file with the city clerk a
written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in
accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or
other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified
in this chapter.
Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other
public way shall be required to file a bond with surety, to be determined by the mayor and council, conditioned to
indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by or resulting from the work undertaken.
(Prior Code, § 16-15)
Sec.	54-32.	-	Specications.
Conformance with city specifications. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the
specifications established or approved from time to time by the mayor and council.
Crosswalk ramps. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street or any connecting street or road for
which curbs have been prescribed shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving on the crosswalks at intersections.
Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically
handicapped persons.
(Prior Code, § 16-16)
Secs.	54-33—54-60.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	EXCAVATIONS
DIVISION	1.	-	GENERALLY
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
168/240
(a)
(b)
Sec.	54-61.	-	Denition.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Public place as employed in this article, shall be construed to mean a street, alley, sidewalk, or other public property owned by the city or
under its supervision.
(Prior Code, § 16-20)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	54-62.	-	Permit	required	to	excavate.
Generally. No person shall dig or excavate in any public place within the city or install, repair, or replace any property or
equipment in such public place, or do any other work in or on any public place, which requires the removal or breaking of the
surface or under part of any such public place, unless and until such person shall have first secured, in the manner provided in
this article, permission to do so.
Penalty. If any person shall do any of the acts referred to in this section without first having secured permission to do so in the
manner provided in this article, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-12
(Prior Code, § 16-21)
Sec.	54-63.	-	Failure	to	complete	or	restore.
Upon the failure of any person, whose application to dig or excavate shall have been granted and who shall have begun the work, to
complete the same without delay, or upon the completion of such work to restore the public place to the same or as good a condition as the
same was before such work was done, or to comply with any reasonable rules or regulations of the mayor and council from time to time
given to such person for the completion and restoration of such public place, such person shall upon conviction, in addition to other
penalties, forfeit to the city any deposit of money so made with the city clerk.
(Prior Code, § 16-22)
Sec.	54-64.	-	Restoration	by	city.
Upon the failure of any person to make such repairs as herein required in the manner or in the time required, the mayor and council are
empowered and authorized to cause such repairs to be made and such public place to be restored to its original condition; and the cost
thereof, plus 25 percent thereof, shall be charged to and paid by such person who so failed to make such repairs; and such sum of money
shall constitute and be a debt due from such person to the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-23)
Sec.	54-65.	-	Prompt	work.
All digging or excavating to be done, as provided in this article, shall be promptly started and completed without delay after permission
shall have been granted, and such public place shall be, immediately upon the completion of such work, restored to the same or as good
condition as the same was before such work was done thereon. Such work or restoration shall be at all times and in all respects in
compliance with the orders and supervision of the mayor and council and from time to time given to such person for such purpose.
(Prior Code, § 16-24)
Sec.	54-66.	-	Warning	devices;	posting	permit.
Upon the granting of an application for permission to dig or excavate in any public place, and in all other cases provided for in this article,
it shall be the duty of the applicant, before beginning any such work, to enclose the place where such work is being done or otherwise afford
adequate protection to street being done or otherwise afford adequate protection to street traffic. Said applicant shall post and keep posted
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
169/240
at such place a placard showing that the work is being done under a permit granted by the city, with sufficient other information thereon to
give ample warning to those using such public place that the same is out of repair or being repaired, and in addition thereto, applicant shall
provide sufficient markings at night by a red light, to notify those having the right to use the same that such public place, or part thereof, is
closed.
(Prior Code, § 16-25)
Sec.	54-67.	-	Clearance	for	re	equipment.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fireplugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of
piles of material or other obstructions.
(Prior Code, § 16-26)
Sec.	54-68.	-	Protection	of	adjoining	property.
The permittee, at his expense, shall at all times preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations
and taking other measures suitable for such purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property
for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the owner of such private property for
such purpose. The permittee shall, at his or her own expense, shape up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be
damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private highways resulting from its
failure to properly protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod
shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been back filled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a
manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such
work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across
private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property the head of
the department of streets and sanitation.
(Prior Code, § 16-27)
Sec.	54-69.	-	Sidewalk	excavations.
Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said
excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can
pass over safely at all times.
(Prior Code, § 16-28)
Sec.	54-70.	-	Protective	measures.
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing, or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using
the street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight
there shall be placed upon each place of excavation and upon any excavated materials or structures or other obstructions to streets suitable
and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night during the maintenance of such obstructions.
(Prior Code, § 16-29)
Sec.	54-71.	-	Care	of	excavated	material.
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as
not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to
those using streets and adjoining property.
(Prior Code, § 16-30)
Sec.	54-72.	-	Damage	to	existing	improvements.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
170/240
(1)
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for
such repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable Code provision or ordinance of the city. If upon being ordered the permittee
fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the city or its authorized representative shall have the authority to cause
said necessary labor and materials to be furnished and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, who shall also be liable on his bond
therefor.
(Prior Code, § 16-31)
Sec.	54-73.	-	Clean-up.
As the excavation work progresses all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and
other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the
permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the head of the department of streets and sanitation. From time to time as may be
ordered by the city through its authorized representative and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall at
permittee's expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work and upon failure to do so
within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the appropriate department head, said work may be done by the city and the cost
thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 16-32)
Sec.	54-74.	-	Noise,	dust,	and	debris.
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable noise, dust, and unsightly debris and shall
conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property.
(Prior Code, § 16-33)
Sec.	54-75.	-	Inspections.
The head of the department of streets and sanitation shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the
provisions of this article and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required
by the mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 16-34)
Sec.	54-76.	-	Decision	of	mayor	and	council	nal.
Any controversy between the person or company acquiring a permit or making a deposit in order to dig or excavate in any public place
and the city clerk or head of the department of streets and sanitation, respecting any of the duties to be performed by any of them, may be
submitted to the mayor and council by any of the parties; and when so submitted the action of the mayor and council thereon shall be
binding on all the parties.
(Prior Code, § 16-35)
Secs.	54-77—54-100.	-	Reserved.
DIVISION	2.	-	PERMITS
Sec.	54-101.	-	Application	for	permit.
Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this article shall submit a written application for such permit to the city
clerk. The written application shall state the following:
The name and address of the applicant;
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
171/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
The purpose for which the application is submitted;
The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work;
The estimated cost of the proposed work; and
The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work and other data or plans as may reasonably be
required by the mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 16-40)
Sec.	54-102.	-	Permit	fee.
Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a permit fee as established by the
mayor and council.
The city clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit,
provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application.
Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this article, the city
clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-41)
Sec.	54-103.	-	Review	of	application.
Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this article, the city clerk shall forward such application to the mayor
and council, who shall approve or disapprove such application during the council meeting following receipt thereof based on, but not limited
to, the following provisions:
That the work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character;
That the operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of egress to and
from the property affected and adjacent properties; and
That the health, welfare, and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired.
(Prior Code, § 16-42)
Sec.	54-104.	-	Issuance	of	permit.
Upon receipt of an approved application from the mayor and council, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which
permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city
clerk.
(Prior Code, § 16-43)
Sec.	54-105.	-	Display	of	permit.
It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity
to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit a permit at or about any location not covered by such permit or to
misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 16-44)
Sec.	54-106.	-	Limitation	of	issuance.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any
bonding requirement imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant.
(Prior Code, § 16-45)
Secs.	54-107—54-140.	-	Reserved.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
172/240
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
ARTICLE	IV.	-	NUMBERING	OF	BUILDINGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-2, adopted May 24, 2005 amended this Code by adding provisions designated as Art. III, §§ 54-61—54-64.
Inasmuch as there were provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as Art. IV, §§ 54-141—54-144 at the discretion of the
editor.
Sec.	54-141.	-	Designation	of	street	numbers.
Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public and private streets shall be assigned by the mayor and
council in accordance with their administrative procedures.
The city shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this article.
(Ord. No. 2005-2, 5-24-2005)
Sec.	54-142.	-	Posting	of	designated	street	address.
The owner or person in charge of any house or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by the
city of the number assigned to the same at any time after the adoption of this section.
Within 60 days after the receipt of such written notification from the city, the owner or occupant or person in charge of a
house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous
place.
It shall be the duty of such owner or person in charge thereof upon affixing the new number to remove any different number
which might be mistaken for, or confused with a number assigned to said structure by the city.
Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a
principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance must display a
separate identification.
Numerals indicating that official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in
a manner to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. The numerals shall be a minimum
of three inches in height.
(Ord. No. 2005-2, 5-24-2005)
Sec.	54-143.	-	New	structures.
Numbers will be assigned to each proposed lot or tract by the Unadilla Planning Commission.
No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from the building
official of the Dooly County Zoning and Building Safety Office the official number of the premises. Final construction approval
for any principal building erected or repaired after the effective date of this section shall be withheld until permanent and
proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 2005-2, 5-24-2005)
Sec.	54-144.	-	Violations.
In the event that the owner or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the terms of this article by failing to affix
the number assigned within 60 days after notification, or by failing within such period to remove any old numbers affixed to such house, or
house entrance, or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number assigned thereto, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 2005-2, 5-24-2005)
Chapter	58	-	TAXATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(41)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
173/240
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance
of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(2); any ordinance providing for local
improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included
in this section saved from repeal, § 1-11(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-191 et seq.; malt beverage tax, § 6-46; businesses, ch. 18;
occupational taxes and regulatory fees, § 18-31 et seq.
State Law reference— Municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; local taxes and fees authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶
I(b); providing funds or extending credit to private persons, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments,
Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I.
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Secs.	58-1—58-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	LIFE	INSURERS'	TAXES	AND	FEES
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies,
O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2.
Sec.	58-31.	-	Insurers	license	fees.
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate
business location in excess of one not covered by section 58-32, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby
levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00: For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company, which is authorized to
transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5.
(Ord. No. 2003-1, § 1, 5-1-2003)
Sec.	58-32.	-	License	fees	for	insurers	insuring	certain	risks	at	additional	business	locations.
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business
organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such
loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an
additional license fee of $14.00 per location for the year 2003 and for each year thereafter.
(Ord. No. 2003-1, § 2, 5-1-2003)
Sec.	58-33.	-	Gross	premiums	tax	imposed	on	life	insurers.
There is hereby levied for the year 2003 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each
insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received
during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross
direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 58-
31.
(Ord. No. 2003-1, § 3, 5-1-2003)
Sec.	58-34.	-	Gross	premiums	tax,	all	other	insurers.
There is hereby levied for the year 2003 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each
insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state
in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-
(42)
(42)
(43)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
174/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied
by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 58-31.
(Ord. No. 2003-1, § 4, 5-1-2003)
Sec.	58-35.	-	Due	date	for	license	fees.
License fees imposed in sections 58-31 and 58-32 shall be due and payable on the first day of 2003 and on the first day of each
subsequent year.
(Ord. No. 2003-1, § 5, 5-1-2003)
Secs.	58-36—58-60.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	FINANCIAL	INSTITUTIONS	BUSINESS	LICENSE	TAX
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
Sec.	58-61.	-	Financial	institutions	business	license	tax;	due	date;	ling	of	return.
Tax levied. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national
banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations a business license tax at
the rate of one-fourth of one percent (0.25 percent) of the gross receipts of said institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross
receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of
business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year.
Filing return of gross receipts. Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the
city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner
and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method
set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the
information provided in said return.
Due date. The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 14-56)
Secs.	58-62—58-90.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	IV.	-	HOTEL-MOTEL	EXCISE	TAX
FOOTNOTE(S):
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.
Sec.	58-91.	-	Denitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, be defined as follows:
City means the City of Unadilla.
Due date means from the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed.
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of
living quarters or residential use.
(44)
(45)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
175/240
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor
hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is
intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any jail,
hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal
restraint.
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year.
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use
or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room.
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any
lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise.
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee,
sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel.
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of
any guest room in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date.
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, nonprofit corporation, or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any
other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and
any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided.
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts,
cash, credits, and property or services, of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant
without deduction therefrom whatsoever.
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
Tax means the tax imposed by this article.
(Prior Code, § 14-57)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	58-92.	-	Imposition	and	rate	of	tax.
There shall be paid a tax of two percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-58)
Sec.	58-93.	-	Collection	of	tax	by	operator;	receipt	to	occupant;	rules	for	collection;	schedules.
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city as provided in the section 58-92 and renting guest rooms in the city, not
exempted under section 58-94, shall collect a tax of two percent on the amount of rent from the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 14-59)
Sec.	58-94.	-	Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident.
(Prior Code, § 14-60)
Sec.	58-95.	-	Registration	of	operator,	form,	and	contents;	executor;	certicate	of	authority.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
176/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on
a form provided by said clerk. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact
business, the location of his place or places of business, and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the
clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by
a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. After such registration, the city clerk shall issue without charge
a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of
business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable.
(Prior Code, § 14-61)
Sec.	58-96.	-	Determination,	returns,	and	payments.
Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day
of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 58-91
Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly
period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent
residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be
required by the clerk.
Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for
and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if said amount is
not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state
tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act," approved February 20, 1951 (1951 Ga. Laws, page
360), as now or hereafter amended.
(Prior Code, § 14-62)
Sec.	58-97.	-	Deciency	determinations.
Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of
the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the clerk may compute and determine the
amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the clerk's possession or that may come into his
possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods.
Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per
month or a fraction thereof from the due date of taxes.
Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk or said clerk's designated representatives shall give to the operator written
notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the
operator at the address as it appears in the records of the clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail
with a receipt signed by addressee.
Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice
of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the
monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever
period should last expire.
(Prior Code, § 14-63)
Sec.	58-98.	-	Determination	if	no	return	made.
Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross
receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The
estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based
upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in section 58-97(c).
Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent
per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
177/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment.
(Prior Code, § 14-64)
Sec.	58-99.	-	Administration.
Authority of clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed
by city ordinance.
Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the city to any person shall keep such
records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require.
Examination of records; audits. The clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers,
records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person, or any operator
liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and
determine the amount required to be paid.
Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the clerk may require the filing of
reports by any persons or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms
which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental
charged for each occupancy, the date of each such occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require.
(Prior Code, § 14-65)
Sec.	58-100.	-	Use	of	proceeds.
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1).
(Prior Code, § 14-66; Ord. No. 2005-4, 5-24-2005)
Sec.	58-101.	-	Violations.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided in section 1-12. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of
which any violation of any provision is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator
or any person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a
supplemental return or other data required by the clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-12.
(Prior Code, § 14-67)
Sec.	58-102.	-	Collection	of	tax.
Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due
and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected,
the clerk may bring an action in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount delinquent,
together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto.
Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If an operator liable for any amount under
this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, such operator's successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the
purchase price to cover such amount owed until the former owner produces a receipt from the clerk showing that said
amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due.
Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a
business fails to withhold purchase price as required, said purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount
required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price.
Tax credit or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest
owing hereunder has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be
offset by the clerk. If the operator or owner determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been
determined by the clerk, such person will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
178/240
specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the clerk, the excess
amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or his
administrators or executors.
(Prior Code, § 14-68)
Secs.	58-103—58-130.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	V.	-	PUBLIC	UTILITY	FRANCHISE	TAX
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 66.
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public
Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5).
Sec.	58-131.	-	Public	utility	franchise	tax;	rate	of	levy.
There is hereby set and levied on each electric light and power company making use of the streets, alleys, or other public ways or places
of the city, for the purpose of rendering utility services, a franchise tax in the amount of four percent of the annual gross revenue received
from residential, commercial, and industrial sales.
(Prior Code, § 14-54)
Sec.	58-132.	-	Due	date	and	required	report.
The public utility franchise tax noted hereinabove shall be paid on the day specified in the franchise agreement between the city and
such public utility, and payment of said franchise tax shall be accompanied by a report showing the volume of gross sales by service
classification.
(Prior Code, § 14-55)
Chapter	62	-	TRAFFIC	AND	VEHICLES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for a schedule of speed zones saved from repeal, § 1-11(19); law enforcement, ch. 38; offenses
and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 54; off-street parking and loading requirements, app. A,
art. V.
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws
pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal
courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior
courts, report of disposition, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local
authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; parking Law for Persons with Disabilities,
O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or
parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3);
power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372;
funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; sirens, whistles and bells
prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; authority to
provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4).
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
(46)
(46)
(47)
(47)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
179/240
(a)
(b)
(a)
Sec.	62-1.	-	Uniform	Rules	of	the	Road	adopted.
Rules adopted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the
Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with
like effect as if recited in this section.
Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of
this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12
(Prior Code, § 17-2)
State law reference— Uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A.
§ 40-6-372.
Sec.	62-2.	-	Speed	detection	devices	authorized.
The chief of police is authorized and approved to use radar speed control devices in accordance with the terms and conditions expressed
in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-14-1—40-14-16.
(Res. No. 98-R-2, 3-24-1998)
Sec.	62-3.	-	Provisions	saved	from	repeal.
Section 17-3 of the prior code on the subject of parades and demonstrations is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect
pending a revision of the subject matter by the city.
Sec.	62-4.	-	Jake	brake	usage	prohibited.
The use of exhaust brakes retarders and Jake brake usage by eighteen-wheel vehicles in the city limits is prohibited. A violation of this
section shall subject the violator to maximum punishment provided under the City Charter/Code section 1-12.
(Ord. No. 10-6, 5-11-2010)
Secs.	62-5—62-30.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	SPEED	ZONES
Sec.	62-31.	-	Established.
Speed limits established. Pursuant O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-183 and 40-6-376 the Uniform Rules of the Road Act, authorizing local
authorities to alter lawful speed limits, based on an engineering and traffic investigation the following speed zones are
established:
ON-SYSTEM
S.R. 7/US 41 from a point 0.30 miles south of Collins Road, the south city limits of Unadilla, (M.P. 15.91) to Collins Road (M.P. 16.21), a distance
of 0.30 miles, to be zoned for 50 miles per hour.
S.R. 7/US 41 from Collins Road (M.P. 16.21) to Powell Road (M.P. 17.00), a distance of 0.79 miles, to be zoned for 40 miles per hour.
S.R. 7/US 41 from Powell Road (M.P. 17.00) to Third Street (M.P. 17.71), a distance of 0.71 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour.
S.R. 7/US 41 from Third Street (M.P. 17.71) to McWhorter Street (M.P. 18.36), a distance of 0.65 miles, to be zoned for 40 miles per hour.
S.R. 7/US 41 from McWhorter Street (M.P. 18.36) to a point 0.25 miles north of Elko Road, the north city limits of Unadilla (M.P. 18.69), a
distance of 0.33 miles, to be zoned for 50 miles per hour.
S.R. 230 from a point 50 feet west of Akins Street, the west city limits of Unadilla, (M.P. 20.60) to a point 500 feet west of West Avenue (M.P.
21.12), a distance of 0.52 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
180/240
(b)
(a)
S.R. 230 from a point 500 feet west of West Avenue (M.P. 21.12) to S.R. 7 (M.P. 21.60), a distance of 0.48 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per
hour.
S.R. 230 School Zone from a point 300 feet west of West Avenue (M.P. 21.15) to a point 300 feet east of School Avenue (M.P. 21.33), a distance
of 0.18 miles, to be zoned for 25 miles per hour. From 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. School days only.
S.R. 230 from S.R. 7 (M.P. 21.60) to a point 100 feet east of Cherry Street (M.P. 21.85), a distance of 0.25 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per
hour.
S.R. 230 from a point 100 feet east of Cherry Street (M.P. 21.85) to Third Street (M.P. 22.14), a distance of 0.29 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles
per hour.
S.R. 230 from Third Street (M.P. 22.14) to a point 50 feet west of Ransom Road, the east city limits of Unadilla (M.P. 22.69), a distance of 0.55 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour.
S.R. 401/I-75 from the south city limits of Unadilla (M.P. 14.66) to the north city limits of Unadilla (M.P. 16.78), a distance of 2.12 miles, to be
zoned for 70 miles per hour.
Signs to be erected by state department of transportation.
OFF-SYSTEM
Beacham Avenue from S.R. 230 to S.R. 7/US 41, a distance of 0.83 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour.
Cherry Street from the south city limits of Unadilla to Ronsom Road, a distance of 0.39 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour.
Cherry Street from Ronsom Road to S.R. 230, a distance of 0.69 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour.
Crumpler Avenue from S.R. 7 to S.R. 7, a distance of 1.05 miles, to be zoned for 25 miles per hour.
East Railroad Street from the west city limits of Unadilla to Ronsom Road, a distance of 0.84 miles, to be zoned for 40 miles per hour.
East Railroad Street from Ronsom Road to First Street, a distance of 0.52 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour.
Third Street from West Railroad Street to S.R. 230, a distance of 0.52 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour.
West Railroad Street from S.R. 7 to S.R. 7, a distance of 0.63 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour.
Signs to be erected by the city.
Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12
(Ord. of 12-16-1997)
Secs.	62-32—62-40.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	III.	-	MOTORIZED	CARTS
Sec.	62-41.	-	Findings;	denition.
The city council finds that all streets located within the territorial boundaries of the city and under its jurisdiction are designed and
constructed so as to safely permit their use by operators of motorized carts, except as stated elsewhere in this article. "Motorized carts" are
defined as those electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, commonly called golf carts, which do not exceed 20 miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 2006-09, 5-15-2006)
Sec.	62-42.	-	Registration.
It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart as operated over the streets to register the cart within the city with ten
business days of the date of the passage of this ordinance for existing motorized carts within the city and within ten business
days of the date of purchase of subsequent motorized carts purchased for use in the city. Two numerical decals shall be issued
upon registration and a record of each motorized cart number along with the name and address of the owner, shall be
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
181/240
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
maintained by the police department. The decals must be affixed to the sides of the cart in such a manner as to be fully visible
at all times. The registration fee for motorized carts operated in the city shall be $10.00, and the registration shall be effective
until such time as the cart is sold or otherwise disposed of. Upon occurrence of a sale of the cart to another person who shall
operate the cart over the streets of the city, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of
the change in ownership at a cost of $5.00. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days, a $20.00 penalty
would be applied in addition to the $5.00 transfer charge. The cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten
business days.
Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Cart registration may be in one person's name only,
and the registration form must be signed by that person.
(Ord. No. 2006-09, 5-15-2006)
Sec.	62-43.	-	Operation	regulations.
Those persons who are 16 years of age and older may drive a motorized cart on the streets unless such person has had his or
her license to operate a motor vehicle suspended or revoked by the state which issued said license in which case such person
shall not be permitted to operate a motorized cart on the streets during the time of suspension or revocation.
Those persons who are 15 years of age but not yet 16 years of age may drive a motorized cart on the streets:
If he or she does not have in his or her possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. §
40-5-24, as may be amended, and has not had his or her instructional permit suspended or revoked, then he or she shall
be accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license or
he or she shall be accompanied in the front seat by a parent, grandparent or legal guardian; or
If he or she has in his or her possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-24, as
may be amended, and is unaccompanied by a licensed driver as provided in subsection (b)(1), or is unaccompanied by a
parent, grandparent or legal guardian as provided in subsection (b)(1), then he or she may be accompanied in the vehicle
by up to one other person who must be at least 15 years of age, or he or she may be accompanied by up to three
immediate family members.
No person under the age of 15 shall be permitted to drive a motorized cart on the streets under any circumstances.
All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets.
Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time.
Motorized carts may be operated over those authorized streets only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are
equipped with functional headlights and taillights.
No motorized carts shall be permitted to operate over, along, or across U.S. Highway 41 or State Route 230 within the
boundaries of the city except where authorized crossings are provided.
(Ord. No. 2006-09, 5-15-2006)
Sec.	62-44.	-	Penalties.
Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12.
(Ord. No. 2006-09, 5-15-2006)
Chapter	66	-	UTILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building development, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; health and
sanitation, ch. 34; damaging, interfering with poles, wires, other fixtures, § 42-5; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 54; public utility franchise tax, § 58-131 et seq.
State Law reference— Water Resources Center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; Waterwell Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.;
dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts
with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); acquisition, construction and operation of water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; limitation
on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5);
(48)
(48)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
182/240
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer
connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes,
O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; authority to provide for the development, storage treatment, purification, and distribution of water, Ga. Const.
art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to
provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6).
ARTICLE	I.	-	IN	GENERAL
Sec.	66-1.	-	Rate	schedule.
Generally. The water and sewer rate schedules for residential and commercial customers shall be as determined from time to
time by the mayor and council.
The water rate for residential users located outside the city limits of the city shall be the same rates as charged for
commercial users.
City fire hydrants may be used to fill swimming pools at a cost as set by the mayor and council. The consumer shall make
application for such water use in person at city hall. At the time of making application, the consumer shall make payment
as set by the mayor and council, and the city clerk shall telephone the fire department for the assistance of their hose.
Sewer rate schedule. A minimum rate as set by the mayor and council per user or 100 percent of the water bill, whichever is
greater, shall be the charge for sewage per connection per month or any portion thereof. Provided, however, the maximum
sewer bill for residential use shall be as set by the mayor and council.
The rate schedule contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling or one-commercial operation.
Extraordinary circumstances, such as subdivision extensions, multiple dwelling units, industrial users, and fire protection,
shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the mayor and council on recommendation of the city's
engineer.
The consumer is entitled to one adjustment per year off the rate of sewage if the water goes through the meter. The
adjustment shall be one-half of the maximum sewer bill for residential use which is as set by the mayor and council.
(Prior Code, § 18-1)
Sec.	66-2.	-	Application	for	water	service;	security	deposit.
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at city hall of the city. At the time of making the application,
homeowners and those renting property shall make a cash security deposit in the amount of $150.00 for water services and $150.00 for gas
service. All applications for utility service will include a Social Security Number of the applicant. The owner of property will be able to inquire
about a renter/customer by calling and giving the account or name and be informed if the account is up to date or not. There will be no other
personal information given out from the city hall on accounts.
(Prior Code, § 18-2; Ord. No. 10-4, § 1, 4-27-2010)
Sec.	66-3.	-	Charges	for	initial	water	and	sewer	service.
Each consumer subscribing to use the water and sewer service of the city shall pay a connection fee in an amount set by the mayor and
council for water connection and in an amount set by the mayor and council for sewer connection. This rate shall apply to any and each
number of connections desired for water service and sewer service. For five-eighths-inch and three-quarter-inch water pipe, per connection,
the city shall charge the above rates. If the water pipe is one inch or more in size, the charge shall be in an amount set by the mayor and
council per connection plus cost of the meter. Also, the city shall install a cut-off valve with an additional charge in an amount set by the
mayor and council to the customer.
(Res. No. 98-R-1, 3-24-1998)
Sec.	66-4.	-	Minimum	charges.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
183/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedules, shall be made for each connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given
lot shall be used on that lot only, and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone.
(Prior Code, § 18-4)
Sec.	66-5.	-	City's	responsibility	and	liability.
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed and
runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section
66-3, will be made for a five-eighths-inch or three-quarter-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee above will be
made for a pipe or water meter of larger dimensions.
The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for
the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service.
The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three
feet of the property line.
The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to
prevent cross connections or backflow.
Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city.
(Prior Code, § 18-5)
Sec.	66-6.	-	Check	valve	on	hot	water	heater	required.
Check valve requirement. No water service shall be provided to any resident, business, industry, or structure unless a check
valve has been installed on the hot water heater serving the customer prior to the initiation of service.
Installation date. All water customers of the city shall install a check valve on hot water heaters within 90 days of the effective
date of the ordinance from which this section is derived.
(Ord. No. 98-3, §§ 1,2, 10-13-1998)
Sec.	66-7.	-	Consumer's	responsibility	and	liability.
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household, and employees only. The
consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire
protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic
consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service.
Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer
therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader.
The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter.
The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a
safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department.
In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer
proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system,
and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers
of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system.
(Prior Code, § 18-6)
Sec.	66-8.	-	Protection	outfall	sewage	and	wetland	protection	along	certain	areas	of	sewer	running	to	state	prison	facility.
No person, firm, or corporation shall build any structure, install any mobile home, or move any structure into an area within 300 feet on
either side of that tract designated as low area owned by "Jack Brannen Farms, Inc.," and that area designated as "Camp Creek," both of said
areas being along the sewer run that will service the state prison being built in the city. The exact location of said sewer line and said areas
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
184/240
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(1)
(2)
are shown on sheets 1, 2, and 3 of 27 on drawings prepared by Tribble & Richardson, Inc., designated as Project Number 6010-03701, dated
January 1989 and entitled "Water and Sewer System Improvements for the City of Unadilla, Georgia." Said drawings are on file in the clerk's
office of the city and are made a part of this section by reference thereto for all purposes.
(Prior Code, § 18-7)
Sec.	66-9.	-	Access	to	premises	and	extensions	of	system.
Access to premises generally. Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer
for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose
in connection with the water service and its facilities and the sewer service and its facilities.
Extensions. Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be
granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer
lines.
(Prior Code, § 18-8)
Sec.	66-10.	-	Discontinuance	of	service;	change	of	occupancy.
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change
occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure,
whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so
will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading.
Should any refund check be due and payable to any customer who has discontinued service, such check will be available at city hall on
the sixth working day following discontinuance. Provided however, the customer may provide a forwarding address in which case a check will
be mailed to the customer.
(Prior Code, § 18-9; Ord. No. 2011-7, § 1, 11-15-2011)
Sec.	66-11.	-	Bills;	penalties;	disconnection;	reconnection;	payment.
Bills; penalties. Bills to customers for all utility services shall be mailed out on or before the first day of each month, and the
amount due as shown on the bill shall be due on the fifteenth day of the month. The failure of utility users to pay the entire
charges imposed on the due date shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties:
If the bill is not paid by the sixteenth day of the month, a late charge of ten percent of the amount of the unpaid bill will
be added to the past due amount. If paid by mail, the mail must be postmarked before the 16th of the month to avoid
the late charge.
Accounts delinquent after 5:00 p.m. on the 25th of the month shall be considered disconnected as of that time, and a
reconnection fee as set by the mayor and council shall be charged to said account. Subsequent to the disconnection of an
account, the water services of any account holder are subject to being physically turned off without further notice. In
addition accounts delinquent after 5:00 p.m. on the 25th of the second month shall be terminated and the account
closed using the deposit toward the unpaid bill. The excess if any will be refunded. If service is to be continued the
customer will be required to open a new account and the fee will be double the original fee plus any amount not covered
by the first deposit.
If the user feels his bill is in error or that there is another legitimate reason for not paying, the user shall notify the city
office of his position in person or in writing prior to the 25th of the month.
Payment of bills. Bills shall be paid at city hall, and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from
becoming delinquent nor relieve the customer from payment of same.
Any customer who, having offered as payment two checks which have not been honored due to insufficient funds over
the course of a single year, must henceforth tender payment of their water and sewer bill in cash or certified funds.
Tender of payment in the form of a check by a customer covered under subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be treated
as nonpayment, and the check shall be returned to the customer, and the customer's account shall be treated as
delinquent if payment in cash or certified funds are not received by the date on which the bill was originally due.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
185/240
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(Prior Code, § 18-10; Res. No. 97-R-10, 12-16-1997; Ord. No. 2005-06, § 1, 12-14-2005; Ord. No. 10-4, § 2, 4-27-10)
Sec.	66-12.	-	Suspension	of	service.
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city.
Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement
of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the
bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts.
Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as
required by the mayor and council is made, and a service charge of $10.00 is paid for each meter reconnected.
The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons:
To prevent fraud or abuse.
Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules.
Emergency repairs.
Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control.
Legal processes.
Direction of public authorities.
Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavailable accident.
(Res. No. 97-R-7)
Sec.	66-13.	-	Complaints;	adjustments.
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such
claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The
consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim.
The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee as set by the mayor and council;
provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made.
Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the
test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge
will be made.
If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is
stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of consumer's previous bills and/or
from other proper data.
(Prior Code, § 18-12)
Sec.	66-14.	-	Natural	gas	rates;	connection	fees;	charges	and	payment.
Determination of rate. The rate for each 1,000 cubic feet of natural gas per month for each customer shall be determined by
the mayor and council and adjusted from time to time as may be necessary.
Service fee. There shall be a service fee as set by the mayor and council for the disconnection or reconnection of any customer
on the natural gas system.
Application for service; security deposit. The consumer shall make application for natural gas, in person at city hall. At the time
of making said application, homeowners shall make a cash security deposit of $100.00 for natural gas service, and rental
customers shall make a cash security deposit as set by the mayor and council for natural gas service. In addition, there shall be
a minimum initial tap fee charge as set by the mayor and council for services rendered any customer of the natural gas
system.
When charges due; failure to make timely payment. Charges for natural gas shall become due on the date specified by the
mayor and council and shall be payable by the owner or occupant at the office of the city clerk. Bills for natural gas shall be
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
186/240
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
rendered along with the bills for other utility services as set out in section 66-11 and failure to make timely payments shall
result in the penalties or termination or both as set out in that section.
(Prior Code, § 18-13; Res. No. 97-R-5, 6-24-1997)
Sec.	66-15.	-	Injury	to	or	tampering	with	water	meters,	etc.
Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally injure, destroy, or permit to be injured or destroyed, any water
meter, pipe, conduit, line, or other apparatus belonging to or operated by the city. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person
to intentionally prevent a water or gas meter belonging to or operated by the city from duly registering the quantity of water or
gas supplied to or in any way interfere with the proper action or just registration of such meters. It shall likewise be unlawful
for any person to intentionally divert any water or gas from any pipe of the city or to otherwise intentionally use or cause to be
used, with the consent of the city, any water or gas manufactured or distributed by the city.
Diversion of water or gas. The existence of any device by whatever name used, for the purpose of diverting any water or gas
from any pipe of the city, shall be prima facie evidence of the intent to defraud by the person receiving the benefits from such
diversion. The existence of such a device shall be deemed presumptive evidence of the intention referred to in this section.
Penalty. Violation under this section shall be punishable by the municipal court of the city as provided in section 1-12
(Prior Code, § 18-14)
Sec.	66-16.	-	Unlawful	use	of	city	water,	gas.
Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person not a regular customer of water or gas from the city water works system or city
gas system or acting under the direction or permission of a regular customer to obtain or use for any purpose whatever,
except for the extinguishment of fire, water or gas from faucets, pipes, or fixtures placed in or on any lot or building for the
use of a regular consumer.
Unauthorized reconnection. It shall be unlawful for any person who is a consumer of water or gas from the city water works
system or city gas system, who has been terminated from service for any reason, to reconnect to the system or to obtain or
use water or gas for any purpose from faucets, pipes, or fixtures without service restarted by city forces.
Penalty. Violation under this section shall be punishable in the municipal court of the city as provided in section 1-12
(Prior Code, § 18-15)
Sec.	66-17.	-	Terms	and	conditions	of	refunds	of	water,	sewer	and	natural	gas	payments.
Complaint notification. In accordance with sections 66-11(a)(3) and 66-13, and in addition thereto, any consumer who has a
complaint regarding the amount of their bill for water, sewer, and or natural gas services, shall notify city hall of their
complaint in person or in writing by the 20th day of the month in which said bill is due.
Refunds. In the event that the city determines there was an error in the consumer's water, sewer, and or natural gas bill, the
consumer shall be entitled to a refund of any amount collected in excess of the consumer's actual bill due for services,
provided that in no event shall the city be liable for in excess of the most recent two months of utility services provided and
billed to the consumer.
(Ord. No. 98-1, 4-14-1998)
Sec.	66-18.	-	Outdoor	irrigation	activities.
Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other
plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the
following outdoor water uses:
Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial
production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine,
hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens,
ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural,
dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3;
Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable county ordinances and
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
187/240
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
state guidelines;
Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations;
Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of
the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater;
Watering personal food gardens;
Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and
for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation;
Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or
surface water is on said property;
Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
Hydroseeding.
This section governs outdoor irrigation activities only.
No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section;
The city shall be the enforcement authority for this section. This mayor or city manager may also authorize other departments as may be
deemed necessary to support enforcement;
Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the Magistrate Court of by any other legal
means set forth in this Code of Ordinances.
The paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this section are severable. Should any paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
section be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall
continue in effect until amended or repealed by the city.
(Ord. No. 11-1, § 1, 1-11-2011)
Editor's note—
Section 1 of Ord. No. 11-1, adopted Jan. 11, 2011, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 66-41. Inasmuch as § 66-41 already
exists, to avoid duplication and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been redesignated as § 66-18
Secs.	66-19—66-40.	-	Reserved.
ARTICLE	II.	-	SEWER	SERVICE
Sec.	66-41.	-	Denitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
Building sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
188/240
(1)
Combined sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and disposing of food, and from the handling,
storage, and sale of produce.
Human excreta means the bodily waste discharges of human beings.
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Natural outlet means any outlet into a water course, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than onehalf inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
Sanitary water closet means any flush toilet property connected with the city sanitary sewerage system, or with a septic tank of approved
construction.
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hours' concentration or flows during normal
operation.
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but exclude
sewage and industrial wastes.
Superintendent means the superintendent of the department of utilities of the city.
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 13-16)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec.	66-42.	-	Sanitary	method	of	disposal	required;	unlawful	acts.
Every residence and building in which human beings reside, or are employed or congregated, shall be required to have a sanitary method
of human excreta disposal; namely, connecting with an approved sewerage system. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any human excreta
within the corporate limits of the city except in a sanitary water closet as defined in section 66-41.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property "within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, or any area served by the city, any
human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
189/240
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area
jurisdiction of said city, or any area served by the city, any sewage industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where s
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage unless provided otherwise by the provisions of this article.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct or malicious mischief.
(Prior Code, § 13-17)
Sec.	66-43.	-	Connection	to	public	sewers.
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the
corporate limits of the city and located within 150 feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or hereafter constructed to which
such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, is hereby required
at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this section within 60 days after date of official notice so to do. However, if in the sole and absolute
discretion of the mayor and council, the city does not require connection by an owner and does not so notify an owner requiring a
connection, nevertheless, such owner shall pay to the city the minimum sewer charge as determined by the city.
Sec.	66-44.	-	Private	sewage	disposal.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 66-43 the building, house or property shall be connected to
a private sewage disposal system, namely a septic tank of approved construction which shall comply with the following provisions:
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit
signed by the superintendent of the department of utilities. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the municipality, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans specifications and other information as
are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and the inspection fee of $2.00 shall be paid to the municipality
at the time the application is filed.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of the
notice by the superintendent.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of
the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface solid absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank shall be
permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided
in section 66-43, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and thereafter any
septic tanks or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no
expense to the municipality.
No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the state department of natural resources.
(Prior Code, § 13-19)
Sec.	66-45.	-	Building	sewers	and	connections.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
190/240
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
The following provisions shall determine the proper procedure to be followed in the installation of building sewers and connections
made into the public sewer system of the city:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer
or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk after receiving the written approval of the
superintendent of the department of utilities.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
for residential and commercial service; and
for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and
inspection fee of $2.00 for residential or commercial building sewer permit and $5.00 for an industrial building
sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city's property line
shall be borne by the owner. The owner will maintain the sewer line from his building to the city's main sewer line. The
owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of
the building sewer. Any connection from the city's property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city for which
the owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee of $150.00 for residential taps and $150.00 for commercial taps.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the
rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the
superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections and joints shall be made
gastight and waterproof. All deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
superintendent before installation.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and the
plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city.
The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe; ASTM specifications A74; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM specifications C13; or
concrete sewer pipe, ASTM specification C14. Joints shall be gas tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that
is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe
with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots.
If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material
may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot.
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building drain shall be lifted by approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 54,
article III of this Code and shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent of the department
of utilities. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification C12; except that no backfill
shall be placed until the work has been inspected. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly placed with oakun or hemp and
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
191/240
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
filled with molten lead, federal specification QQL-156, not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and
caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coating shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been
tested and approved. Rubber joint cast iron pipe may be used as an alternate.
All joins in vitrified clay or concrete pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot pouring
joining material, as specified below or by using rubber gasket or preformed, factory-supplied couplings having resilient
properties in accordance with ASTM specification C443-59T for concrete pipe and ASTM specification C425-64 for vitrified
clay pipe, or the latest revision thereof.
Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a
temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit, nor the soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint
shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp, or similar approved material. Other joining materials and methods may be
used only by approval of the superintendent.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a
suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the
municipality shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the
public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into
the public sewer to receive the building sewer, which entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees.
A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface
of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher
elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and
watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the
superintendent.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazard and conducted in accordance with chapter 54, article III of this Code. Streets, curbs, sidewalks, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in the manner provided for in this Code.
(Prior Code, § 13-20)
Sec.	66-46.	-	Regulation	of	discharges	into	public	sewers.
Stormwater, surface water, and drainage discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling
waters or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
Prohibited discharges. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waste or waters to any public sewer:
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit.
Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or greases.
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any
other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other inference with the proper
operation of the sewage works.
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
192/240
(7)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
(8)
(9)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
(g)
(h)
(i)
Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment pla
upper limits for the constituents listed below, in parts per million shall be:
Cadmium: 0.02
Chromium: 1.00
Copper: 1.00
Cyanide: 0.20
Nickel: 1.00
Silver: 1.00
Lead: 0.10
Zinc: 3.00
Phenol: 0.05
Arsenic: 0.05
Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the
superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Construction of grease and oil interceptors. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable
of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. The grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and
watertight. When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times.
Admission of certain wastes. The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having:
A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter;
Containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of suspended solids; or
Containing any quantity of substance having average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow
of the municipality shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of
the superintendent, the owner shall provide at the owner's expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per
liter; or
Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection (c) of
this section; or
Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the
superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing.
Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense.
Control manholes. When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and the
owner at his expense shall maintain the same so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Measurements, tests and analysis. All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
193/240
(j)
(a)
(b)
reference is made in subsections (c) and (f) of this section shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage," shall be determined at the control manhole provided in subsection (h) of this section, or
upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.
Special agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby any industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment of the cost of such treatment.
(Prior Code, § 13-21)
Sec.	66-47.	-	Power	and	authority	of	inspectors.
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
(Prior Code, § 13-22)
Sec.	66-48.	-	Penalties.
Generally. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 66-42(d), or any provision enumerated
in chapter 54 of this Code shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
Continuing violations. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article, except section 66-42(d) or who shall continue
any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in section 66-43 or who shall continue any other violation hereof
beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-
12
(Prior Code, § 13-23)
APPENDIX	A	-	ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
Editor's note— Printed herein is the City of Unadilla Zoning Ordinance dated August 15, 1995. Amendments to the ordinance are
indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains
unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic
purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression
of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2;
conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60;
authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV.
ARTICLE	I.	-	INTRODUCTION
Section	1.	-	Title.
Provided in this section are the short title and long title of this ordinance.
I.1.1 Short title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Unadilla, Georgia."
(49)
(49)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
194/240
I.1.2 Long title. An ordinance of the City of Unadilla, Georgia, to regulate the use of land and buildings by dividing the City of Unadilla into
districts; defining certain terms used therein; imposing regulations, prohibitions and restrictions governing the erection, construction, and
reconstruction of structures and buildings and the use of lands for business, industry, residence, social, and other specified purposes;
regulating and limiting the height of buildings and open spaces, regulating and limiting congestion on the public streets; providing for the
gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings, and structures; establishing the boundaries of districts; and providing the
means of enforcing said ordinance and providing a penalty for violation of said ordinance, and repealing conflicting ordinances.
Section	2.	-	Authority	for	enactment	and	purpose.
The mayor and council of the City of Unadilla enact this ordinance under the exercise of powers conferred upon it by the Ga. Const. art.
IX, § II, ¶ IV.
Said zoning ordinance is enacted expressly for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and
the general welfare of residents within the City of Unadilla.
ARTICLE	II.	-	DEFINITIONS
Section	1.	-	Interpretation	of	certain	terms	and	words.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural
include the singular.
The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, company, corporation or association.
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
The word "building" includes the word "structure."
The word "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed," reconstructed," "altered," "placed," and "moved."
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or
designed to be used or occupied."
Section	2.	-	Denitions	as	intended	by	this	ordinance.
The definitions listed in this section are either referred to in this ordinance or reserved for future reference.
Accessory structure or use: A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and
related to the principal structure or use of the land; and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use, including
residential swimming pools.
Agriculture: The production, keeping, or maintenance, for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including, but
not limited to: forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and poultry products; livestock,
including beef cattle, sheep swine, horses, ponies, mules, goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of
any or all such animals; bees and apiary products, fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts, and
berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental, and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management
program. Retail selling of products raised on the premises shall be considered a normal accessory activity provided that space adequate for
the parking of customer's vehicles shall be provided off the public right-of-way.
Apartment building: A multifamily dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single ownership containing four or more independent
housekeeping units having cooking facilities.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
195/240
Area of special flood hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
Automobile sales lot: An open premises arranged, designed, or used for storage and display for sale of any motor vehicle or any type of
trailer.
Base flood: That flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Boarding or rooming house: A building dedicated to the lodging or feeding or both of five or more nontransient persons or separate
families as defined herein for compensation.
Buffer area; buffer strip: A landscaped open area and/or screened area designed to separate incompatible uses.
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering and designed, built, or
used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind including tents or awnings used for purposes of a building.
Building height: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the
building to the highest point of the building.
Building line: A line beyond which the foundation wall and any roofed porch, vestibule, or other such portion of a building shall not
project.
Building principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which the structure is situated.
Care home: A rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar use established and operated on a profit or
nonprofit basis to provide lodging and or meals and domiciliary care for the aged, infirm, chronically ill or convalescent persons, the term
"care home" shall include the term "extended care facility" as defined by Georgia Law. Such facility shall be licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-
7-12 where appropriate.
Caretaker or employee residence: An accessory residence (including mobile and manufactured homes) placed on an occupied tract for
use by a bona fide caretaker, employee, or the owner himself.
Church, club, or lodge: Building in which organized religious, fraternal, recreational, social, or educational meetings are conducted on a
regular nonprofit basis. Fraternal organizations must show that they have received recognition and sanction from a parent group or
organization. A private club must show that its membership is limited by either: (a) the use and operation of an amateur athletic facility
including, but not limited to, golf courses, tennis courts, shooting ranges, or swimming pools; or (b) residency in a particular subdivision,
condominium, apartment project, or other residential development.
Club or lodge (private): An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political,
recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public.
Condominium: A building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant holds full title to his unit and joint ownership in the
common grounds.
Curb cut: The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street.
Day care center: An establishment which provides care and education for six or more children opened for the major portion of the day or
night and in which meals are served.
Density: The overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referring to residential areas, density is defined as the number of
housing units permitted per acre in the respective zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of this zoning ordinance or as
authorized under the development standards of this ordinance.
Drive-in: A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the consumer on the inside of the principal building and to the
consumer while in his motor vehicle through an exterior wall of the principle building. The term "drive-in" includes drive-in restaurants and
dairy bars, theaters, banks, laundries, food stores and/or car washes.
Dwelling, single-family: A detached building used and either designed or constructed for one dwelling unit.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
196/240
Dwelling, single-family, attached: One of a series of two or more single-family dwelling units built on separate lots attached to another
dwelling unit on an adjoining lot by a common party wall.
Dwelling, manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured Homes shall be constructed in accordance with Federal Manufactured
Home Construction Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq.
Dwelling, two-family or duplex: A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are
connected by a fire rated common wall and/or if two stories in height by a fire rated common floor.
Dwelling, multifamily: A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each
dwelling unit having a party wall or party floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments,
condominiums, or any other type of multifamily structure.
Dwelling unit: An enclosure of one or more rooms, including kitchen and bathroom facilities, designed or constructed as a unit for
residential occupancy by one family.
Easement: A grant to a person or to the public by a property owner of a strip of his land for road right-of-way or other specified
purposes.
Family: One or more persons permanently occupying a single dwelling unit provided that unless all members are related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, and including foster children, (as that term is defined under Georgia Law) no single dwelling unit shall contain over five
persons.
Farm: A parcel of land five acres or more on which bona fide agricultural and related uses are conducted as specified in "agriculture."
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM): The official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where the areas of special
flood hazard have been designated as Zone A.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): The official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Frontage: That dimension of a lot measured along the front right-of-way line thereof or, if said front right-of-way line is curved, along the
chord of the arc.
Garage, repair: Building and premises designed or used for the purpose of service or commercial repair of motor vehicles, provided that
all the body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and provided further that the storage of junk, wrecked
vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies, shall be solely for the purpose of repairing motor vehicles and not as a salvage or junkyard business,
and provided that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts, or supplies not be visible beyond the premises.
Group home: A residence under the ownership and supervision of a public educational or governmental institution occupied or intended
for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or
families.
Home occupation: An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and
no more than one nonresident and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. A
home occupation does not allow access by the public. A home occupation is designed to be less restrictive than a home office but more
restrictive than a residential business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees, and types of businesses.
Home office: An office use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by the occupant thereof and no other individual and
which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The office may be for the purpose of
service or trade workers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers, real estate salespersons, or
individuals who work at home, such as writers or computer programmers. There will be no changes which would alter the character of the
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
197/240
dwelling or reveal from the exterior that the dwelling is being used in part for other than residential purposes. The office shall be limited to
one room of the dwelling and not exceed more than 300 square feet in area. Home office shall not include any business which involves the
sale, manufacture, or repair of merchandise on the premises. Home offices shall also not include any business requiring access by the public,
including, but not limited to, customers, clients, or vendors. No outside storage or display, including signs, is permitted, and no one other
than family members who reside on the premises may be employed in the office.
Hospital: Any institution receiving inpatients and rendering medical care including those wherein mentally retarded, mentally disturbed,
epileptic, alcoholic, drug addicted, chronically ill, and physically disabled patients are treated or cared for, such facility shall be legally and
properly certified, licensed, approved, and otherwise sanctioned by the appropriate state or federal agency.
Industrial park: A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner which provides a
park setting for industrial establishments.
Junkyard: Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other
scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or
abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
Kennel, commercial: Any place in or at which more than four adult dogs, cats, rabbits, or other domesticated animals are kept for the
purpose of sale, boarding, care, breeding, or training and for which any fee is charged. This term does not include agrarian or agricultural
uses.
Laboratory: An establishment or premises where scientific services are provided including testing or analysis of medical, chemical,
physical, mechanical, electric, or electronic nature or the calibration of instruments.
Lodging home: See "Boarding Home."
Lot: A parcel of land which satisfies the area requirements for the district within which it is located, or on which exists a legal
nonconforming use, and has frontage along or legal access to a public right-of-way, and is intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for
building development. A lot shall have a separate tax parcel reference number designated in the office of the county tax commissioner
and/or the county tax appraiser.
Lot line, front: The front property line coincident with the street right-of-way line. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line
facing the principal building entrance.
Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot line, rear: The real lot line is generally opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot comes to
a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, and lying wholly within
the lot and farthest from the front lot line.
Lot, corner: A lot having frontage on two or more public streets at their intersection.
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Dooly County or a parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
Lot, through: A lot other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one street or a corner lot having frontage on three or more
streets.
Lot width: The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this ordinance or, if no
setback line is established, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line.
Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured homes shall be constructed in accordance with Federal Manufactured
Home Construction Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
198/240
a.
b.
c.
Manufactured home park: An area, under single ownership and not subdivided into customary lots, containing two or more mobile
homes used as living facilities, or an area containing two or more spaces designed or intended for parking of mobile homes to be used as
living facilities.
Materials recovery facility: A solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials,
materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials, and as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-
22, as amended.
Mobile home: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or
more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976.
Modular home: A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a
permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and bears a seal of compliance with regulations of the
Southern Building Code Congress International, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act, or the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act, as amended.
Motel: A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms and having separate outside entrances for each guest room and to be
used primarily for automobile transients and including such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge" but not "boardinghouse" as defined in
this section.
Nonconforming use: Any building or use which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of this resolution and which does not conform with
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nursery school: An agency, organization, or individual providing daytime care of six or more children not related by blood or marriage or
not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult.
Occupy: To use land or buildings for any length of time for a purpose for which the land or a building or part thereof is used or is
intended to be used. Any variation of the term "occupy" shall be encompassed by this definition.
Park, community: A parcel of land owned by a unit of government or a private organization used or intended to be used for recreational
or leisure time activities and which is open to the public at no charge. Such parks may include food or recreational sales as accessory uses.
Personal care home: A building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and
services, including room, meals, and personal care for nonfamily, ambulatory adults for compensation. The following are three specific types
of personal care homes:
Family personal care home: A home for adults in a family type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care
to two through six persons.
Group personal care home: A home for adults in a residence or other type building(s), noninstitutional in character, which
offers care to seven through 15 persons.
Congregate personal care home: A home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons.
Plat: A sketch, map, or survey of a lot, tract, or parcel of land including lot lines, street rights-of-way, and easements with the dimensions
of these features inscribed thereon.
Plat, development: A preliminary design which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its workability
and conformation to the design requirements of the subdivision regulations in all aspects but is not in final form for recording, and the
details are not completely computed. The development plat shall be approved by the planning board prior to any development.
Plat, final: A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification
necessary for commission, and the streets shown on the plat shall be approved by the board of commissioners prior to recording.
Principal building: The building containing or to contain the principal use of a lot.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
199/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Principal use: The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or
may be used, occupied, or maintained.
Private way: A private street, drive, or road which is used solely for those property owners which are contiguous to and have a legal right
to use.
Public right-of-way: A street or road which has been dedicated for public use by deed, plat, and/or prescription.
Public street: Right-of-way dedicated to the city, county, state, or federal government or owned by the city, county, state, or federal
government for public street purposes.
Recreational use of a commercial nature: A building or use which provides entertainment, education, recreation, or amusement for
profit, such as, but not limited to, a health spa, dancehall, bowling alley, skating rink, shooting range, fortunetelling, amusement park, private
zoo, sports stadium or arena, art gallery, concert hall, swimming pool, or drive-in theater.
Residence: A building containing only dwelling units and which meets all the applicable requirements of the Standard Building Code for
conventional construction. The term "residence" or any combination thereof shall not be deemed to include hotel, boardinghouse,
roominghouse, motel, or other accommodations used for transient occupancy and shall not, for the purpose of this regulation include travel
trailers, mobile homes, or manufactured homes.
Residence, single-family: A building other than a mobile home, manufactured home, or travel trailer designed for occupancy by one
family.
Residence, multifamily: A building for three or more dwelling units.
Residence, two-family (duplex): A building designed for two dwelling units.
Restaurant: An establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or
refreshment stand at a public or nonprofit community swimming pool, playground, park, or marina operated solely for the convenience of
patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant.
Residential business: An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and no
more than two nonresidents, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The
business may allow access by the public. The residential business is designed to be less restrictive than a home office or home occupation but
more restrictive than a rural business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees, and types of business.
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, or the lot line of an adjacent lot, and the front, rear, or side
lines of a building on the lot with setback restrictions. The term "required setback" means a line beyond which a building is not permitted to
extend under the provisions of this zoning ordinance establishing minimum depth and widths of yards.
Sign: Any surface, fabric, or device bearing lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed
to public view; or any structure (including billboard or poster panel) designed to carry the above visual information.
Advertising separate use sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment
conducted, sold, or offered only elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
Advertising incidental use sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, or entertainment conducted,
sold, or offered as a minor and incidental activity upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
Bulletin board: A sign used to announce meetings or programs to be held on the premises of a church, community
recreation center, school, auditorium, library, museum, or similar noncommercial places of public assembly.
Identification sign: A sign used to identify only the name of the individual, family, organization, or enterprise occupying
the premises.
Point of business sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, or industry located upon the premises
where the sign is displayed, to type of products sold, manufactured, or assembled, and/or to service or entertainment
offered on said premises, but not a sign pertaining to the preceding if such activity is only minor and incidental to the
principal use of the premises.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
200/240
Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on
the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, and fall-out shelters but do not
include walls or fences.
Tourist home: A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to four or less transient visitors for compensation.
Townhouse: A residential structure containing three or more attached single-family units designed as a single structure having common
or party walls. Each unit shall have its own front door which opens to the outdoors, and the units shall have two floors, but without access
between adjoining units.
Travel trailer: A vehicular portable structure not over eight feet by 35 feet and designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational,
and vacation uses which may or may not have kitchen equipment, toilet, lavatory, and bathing facilities, but if such facilities are included, a
sewage holding tank for sanitary waste is required. Any vehicle designed or converted to a design with plumbing connections for attachment
to outside sewage systems shall not be included in this definition.
Travel trailer park: A parcel of land which has been planned and developed to accommodate two or more travel trailers, tents, or other
camping units for temporary occupancy of not over 60 days' duration.
Use, permitted: Those uses specifically listed in this resolution [ordinance] as "permitted uses" and uses subject to approval by the
planning commission.
Use, principal: The principal purpose for which a lot or building is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.
Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the dimensional and/or development standards of the zoning ordinance that will not be contrary to
the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the intentional actions of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
Water system, community: A potable water supply and treatment system other than an individual or public water system serving more
than one building, residence, manufactured, or mobile home or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. The
system is one which is owned by a person or legal entity other than a unit of government.
Water system, individual: A potable water system other than a community or public water system serving a single building, residence,
manufactured, or mobile home, or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation.
Water system, public: A potable water supply and treatment system, other than an individual or community water system, owned by a
unit of government.
Yard, front: That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building of the lot and extending across
the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. (See Setback illustration.)
Yard, rear: That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the
principal building on the lot. (See Setback illustration.)
Yard, side: That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
(See Setback illustration.)
Editor's note—
The setback illustrations for accompanying the definitions for front yard, rear yard, and side yard have been omitted from this codification.
Official copies of such illustrations are on file in the office if the city clerk.
ARTICLE	III.	-	GENERAL	PROVISIONS
Section	1.	-	Conicting	regulations.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
201/240
a.
1.
2.
b.
Whenever any provision of this ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are
imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, the provision of this ordinance shall govern.
Section	2.	-	Scope.
No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereinafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered and maintained, and no new
use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure, or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance.
Section	3.	-	Street,	alleys,	and	railroad	rights-of-way.
All streets, alleys, and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the
property immediately abutting such streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street or alley serves as a district
boundary, the zoning of such street or alley, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting
property up to such centerline.
Section	4.	-	Permitted	uses.
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered; nor shall any building or land be used, designed,
or arranged for any purpose other than is permitted in the zoning district in which the building or land is located.
Section	5.	-	Only	one	principal	use	per	lot.
For every lot or parcel in the unincorporated area of the county there is to be only one principal use per lot. However, the number and
type of secondary and accessory uses per lot or parcel depends upon the zoning district.
Section	6.	-	Street	access.
Any building established as a part of a group development project which cannot properly be served by emergency or service vehicles
from an abutting street shall be made accessible to such vehicles by a paved driveway having roadbed width of not less than 20 feet,
exclusive of parking spaces.
Section	7.	-	"Grandfather	clauses."
A so-called "grandfather clause" is a very open and often misinterpreted term. In this ordinance there are only two items that resemble
what many refer to as a "grandfather clause." These are substandard lots or nonconforming uses.
III.7.1 Substandard lots. Any residentially zoned lot which was of record at the time of the adoption of this ordinance that does not meet
the requirements of this ordinance for yards or other area may be utilized for single residence purposes upon administrative approval by the
city council through the variance process set forth in article XI, section 1.
III.7.2 Nonconforming buildings and uses. Any lawful use of the land or buildings existing at the date of passage of this ordinance and
located in a district in which it would not be permitted as a new use under the regulations of this ordinance is hereby declared to be a
"nonconforming use" and not in violation of this ordinance at the date of adoption of this ordinance; provided, however, that a
nonconforming use shall be subject to, and the owner shall comply with, the following regulations:
The nonconforming use of land, which exists when this ordinance becomes effective, may be continued provided that:
No such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended.
If such nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued for six months or changed, any future use
of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
No building which houses a nonconforming use which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or
by public enemy to the extent of 75 percent of its market value, exclusive of the foundation at the time such damage
occurred, shall thereafter be made to conform with the provisions of this ordinance. If such damage is less than 75
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
202/240
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
a.
b.
c.
d.
percent of its market value before said damage occurred, exclusive of the foundation, then such structure may be
restored to the same nonconforming use as existed before such damage; provided, however, that a building permit to
initiate restoration must be obtained within six months of the occurrence of damage; otherwise, the provisions of section
14.03 will apply.
Any nonconforming use of land or building which has become vacant or remains unoccupied owing to abandonment or
discontinuance for a period of six months shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
Section	8.	-	Sight	distances	at	intersections.
In all zoning districts other than the central business district, no fence, wall, hedge, or shrub planting which obstructs the sight lines at
elevations between two and 12 feet above the roadways shall be placed on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street
property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded property
corner, from the intersection of the street property lines.
Section	9.	-	Reduction	of	lot	area	prohibited.
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width, yard requirements, lot area per dwelling unit, or other requirements of this ordinance are
not maintained.
Section	10.	-	Residential	use	standards.
The following requirements apply to land use of residential districts. Also listed are protective screening requirements for development
abutting one or more residential districts:
III.10.1 Accessory residential buildings. Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance, shall be subject to the
following regulations:
Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all
regulations of this ordinance applicable to main or principal buildings.
In no instance shall such a building be nearer than five feet to any adjoining side lot line or rear lot line.
No detached accessory building shall be located closer than 15 feet to any principal building.
In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both street frontages
wherever there are any principal buildings fronting on said streets in the same block or adjacent blocks.
When an accessory building is to be located on a corner lot, said building shall not project beyond the front yard line
required on the lot of such corner lot.
Garages/carports. In any residence zone, no garage or carport shall be erected closer to the side lot line than the
permitted distance for the dwelling, unless the garage or carport shall be completely to the rear of the dwelling, in which
event, the garage or carport may be erected five feet from the side and rear lot line.
III.10.2 Prohibited uses in all residential districts. In order to uphold public safety and preserve a suitable quality of life for the residents
of Unadilla the following uses are prohibited in all residential districts. Under no exception are the following uses to be permitted in
residential zoned districts:
It shall be [a] prohibited use in all residentially zoned districts to park or store wrecked or junked vehicles, power-driven
construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material in quantity.
Tractor-trailer combinations, tractors, or trailers shall not be placed or stored in residentially zoned districts.
Kennels.
Livestock or poultry.
III.10.3 Protective screening. In order to provide adequate protective screening for residential areas adjacent to or near nonresidential
areas, the following regulations shall apply.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
203/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
All property zoned for commercial, office-institutional, and industrial uses shall have a buffer strip along any rear and side p
abutting a residential district.
A landscaped greenbelt, nor [not] less than 20 feet wide, shall be provided and maintained along its entire length,
including alleys. Such greenbelt shall be planted with deciduous trees, evergreens, flowering trees, or ornamental trees,
designed or intended to provide a visual screen at the boundaries of conflicting land uses.
The remainder of the landscaped area which is not planted with the aforementioned stock shall be in well-kept lawn. All
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition.
All planting plans shall be first submitted to the administrative assistant for approval as to suitability of planting materials
and arrangement thereof in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Section	11.	-	Satellite	receiving	dish	antenna.
Satellite receiving dish antenna shall be allowed in all zoning districts. However, in all residential zones, the following requirements will
apply.
III.11.1 Location and installation. Antenna will be erected in a rear yard and the setback requirements from the property line will be the
same as those required of an accessory building. Location of the antenna must be approved by the administrative assistant of the city before
installation can begin.
III.11.2 Nonconforming dish or antenna. A property owner who has in place a nonconforming antenna at the effective date of this
ordinance may continue to maintain the antenna.
Section	12.	-	Zoning	of	annexed	areas.
To ensure that all lands within the City of Unadilla are always under the city's zoning powers, an appropriate zoning classification will be
executed and made a part of the property annexation process. If the annexation is requested by anyone other than the City of Unadilla, the
applicant will pay the appropriate fees for a zoning petition. In any case, however, the zoning of all annexed properties will follow the same
zoning policies and procedures as outlined in this ordinance.
ARTICLE	IV.	-	ZONING	DISTRICTS
Section	1.	-	Districts	and	their	boundaries.
Listed below are the different land use zones or "zoning districts" that are depicted on a map of the city referred to as the zoning map.
IV.1.1 List of zoning districts. The City of Unadilla is hereby divided into the following six classes of zoning districts:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Multifamily Residential District
C-1 Neighborhood Business District
C-2 Central Business District
I Industrial District
AG Agricultural District
IV.1.2 Official zoning map. The boundaries of these districts are shown on the map which is designated as the Official Zoning Map of the
City of Unadilla. The official zoning map is on file in the office of the city clerk, and all notations, references, and other information shown
thereon are a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if said zoning map and all such notations, references, and other
information shown thereon were fully set forth or described herein.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
204/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
1.
2.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Except where reference on zoning map to a street or other designated line is made by dimensions shown on said map, the district
boundary lines follow lot lines extended and the corporation limits of the City of Unadilla as they existed at the time of adoption of this
ordinance. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the zoning map, the Unadilla City
Council shall rule on such boundaries.
Section	2.	-	R-1:	Single-family	residential	district.
Listed in this section are the purpose, permitted uses, and secondary and accessory uses permitted in single-family residential districts
delineated on the Unadilla Zoning Map.
IV.2.1 Statement of purpose. This single-family residential district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for low
density single family dwelling units. For the R-1 single-family residential district, the specific intent is to encourage the construction of and the
continued use of the land for low density single-family residential development within the city and to discourage land uses which would
generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets.
IV.2.2 Permitted Uses. Development in the R-1 district is limited to the following uses:
Single-family detached dwellings, except mobile homes.
Churches, provided that the proposed site is not less than one acre and a complete site development sketch is submitted
with the application and provision is made for off-street parking.
Cemeteries, provided that a complete site development sketch is submitted with the application.
Clubs and lodges not operating for profit, provided that:
The buildings are not placed closer than 50 feet to any property lines; and
There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear lot lines.
Public buildings, structures, or other public land uses.
Hospitals and clinics.
Home occupations - Home occupations as limited and defined in article II hereof.
Home offices - Home offices as limited and defined in article II hereof.
Nursery schools, kindergartens, or day care facilities provided that all state licensing requirements are met.
Personal care homes.
Other uses similar to the above and compatible with the particular neighborhood as interpreted by the city council.
IV.2.3 Secondary uses permitted in R-1 districts.
Vegetable gardens.
Guest homes (frame built).
IV.2.4 Accessory uses permitted in R-1 districts.
Swimming pools.
Recreational court facilities (tennis, basketball, volleyball, etc.).
Tool sheds less than 10 percent the size of the dwelling.
Playhouses for children.
Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not
involving any business, profession, trade, or occupation.
Section	3.	-	R-2:	One,	two,	and	multiple	family	residential	district.
Listed in this section are the purpose, permitted uses, and secondary and accessory uses permitted in one, two, and multiple family
residential districts delineated on the Unadilla Zoning Map.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
205/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
IV.3.1. Statement of purpose. The R-2 residential district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for medium
density single-family dwellings. For the R-2 residential district, in promoting the general purpose of these regulations, the specific intent of
this section is to encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for medium density residential development and to
discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those
streets.
IV.3.2 Permitted uses. Development in the R-2 district is limited to the following uses:
Single-family detached dwellings.
Mobile homes.
Planned unit developments of which at least 50 percent of the development is dedicated to residential and the other uses
do not abut on any residential district.
Any use listed under section three of the R-1 zoning district.
Mobile home parks (See article VIII). Nonresidential uses must not abut any residential district.
Duplexes, triplexes, and quadraplexes.
Apartments.
IV.3.3 Secondary uses permitted in R-2 districts.
Home occupations.
All secondary uses permitted in R-1 zones.
Storage garages for equipment used off premises (all stored items must be completely enclosed.)
IV.3.4 Accessory uses permitted in R-2 districts
All accessory uses permitted in R-1.
Tool sheds less than ten percent the size of the building.
Utility easements and substations.
Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not
involving any business, professional, trade, or occupation.
Section	4.	-	AG:	Agricultural	district.
Listed in this section are the purpose, permitted uses, and secondary and accessory uses permitted in agricultural districts delineated on
the Unadilla Zoning Map.
IV.4.1 Statement of purpose. The purpose of the agricultural district within the City of Unadilla is to provide for continuing agricultural
related development but where the present application of nonagricultural related controls would be unreasonable or premature.
IV.4-2 Permitted uses. Development in the AG district is limited to the following uses:
Agriculture-related activities.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Mobile homes.
Animal hospitals.
Dog kennels.
Churches.
Cemeteries.
Rural businesses.
IV.4.3 Secondary uses permitted in AG districts.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
206/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
1.
2.
j.
k.
a.
b.
Vegetable stands.
Rural business (See section III, Definitions).
Nurseries and greenhouses.
Marinas and boat docks.
Fishing ponds.
Horse stables.
IV.4.4 Accessory uses permitted in AG districts.
Storage barns.
Greenhouses.
Silos.
Warehouses for storage of products or equipment including cold storage.
Guest house (one per farm unit)
Horse stables.
Signs for on site advertising
Section	5.	-	C-1:	Neighborhood	business	district.
Listed in this section are the purpose, permitted uses, and secondary and accessory uses permitted in neighborhood business districts
delineated on the Unadilla Zoning Map.
IV.5.1 Statement of purpose. The neighborhood business district is intended to permit retail business and service uses which are needed
to serve nearby residential areas. In order to promote such business development, uses are prohibited which would create hazards,
offensive, and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. The intent of this district is also to
encourage the concentration of local business areas in locations which poses the mutual advantages of both the consumers and merchants
and thereby promotes the best use of land at certain strategic locations.
IV.5.2 Permitted uses. Development in the C-1 district is limited to the following uses:
Barber/beauty shops and other personal service establishments.
Clubs and lodges (see section 2).
Child care centers, kindergartens, and special schools.
Laundry or dry cleaning establishments.
Professional offices.
Repairs, electrical or other household appliances, locks, radios, televisions, etc.
Restaurants, in existing structures with no more than 2,000 square feet of floor space devoted to such use.
Small retail businesses selling convenience goods and serving the adjacent residential neighborhoods such as drug,
goods, bakery, and tailor shops.
Other uses similar to the above, subject to the following restrictions:
All businesses shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
Churches or other religious institutions. (See section two hereof.)
Service stations.
IV.5.3 Secondary uses permitted in C-1 districts.
Any combination of permitted uses.
Patios, terraces, courtyards, and outdoor dining facilities.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
207/240
c.
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.
o.
p.
q.
r.
s.
t.
u.
v.
w.
x.
Recreational facilities, including driving ranges, batting cages, and miniature golf.
IV.5.4 Accessory uses permitted in C-1 districts.
Storage sheds.
Automatic teller machines.
Utility easements and substations.
IV.5.5 Protective screening. Protective screening for C-1 districts adjacent to residential districts shall be in compliance with the
regulations set forth in article III section 10.3 of this ordinance.
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.
Section	6.	-	C-2:	Central	business	district.
Listed in this section are the purpose, permitted uses, and secondary and accessory uses permitted in central business districts
delineated on the Unadilla Zoning Map.
IV.6.1 Statement of purpose. The central business district is intended to protect and promote suitable areas for business and commercial
uses which benefit from proximity to each other, to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to a central business area and
to encourage the intensive development of a centralized business center of the City of Unadilla.
IV.6.2 Permitted uses. Development in the C-2 district is limited to the following uses:
Retail business and service establishments.
Financial institutions.
Hotels.
Professional offices.
Churches. (See section 5.03a).
Clinics and nursing homes.
Publicly owned and operated buildings and public utilities.
Multiple family residential dwellings, boarding or rooming houses.
Night clubs.
Motels.
Automobile sales and service.
Service stations.
Agricultural implement sales and service.
Wholesale stores, storage buildings, warehouses, distributing plants, freezer, and lockers.
Small fabrication and manufacturing shops, when employing not more than ten employees in the office and
manufacturing operations.
Cemeteries.
Churches and other religious institutions. (See section 5.03a.)
Hospitals, clinics, and nursing homes.
Night clubs (same development standards as in section 5.03c).
Publicly owned and operated buildings.
Schools.
Open air business.
Mini-warehouses.
Other uses similar to the above and subject to the following regulations:
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
208/240
1.
2.
3.
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.
o.
p.
q.
r.
All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers.
All goods provided on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
All business, servicing or processing, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
IV.6.3. Secondary uses permitted in C-2 districts.
Storage warehouses.
Any combination of uses permitted unconditionally in C-1 or C-2.
IV.6.4. Accessory uses permitted in C-2 districts.
Parking garages.
Car washes.
Utility easements and substations.
IV.6.5. Protective screening. Protective screening for requirements of C-2 district adjacent to or near residential districts shall be in
compliance with the regulations set forth in article III section 10.3.
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.
Section	7.	-	I:	Industrial	district.
Protective screening for C-1 districts adjacent to residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in article III,
section 10.3 of this ordinance.
IV.7.1 Statement of purpose. The intent of the manufacturing district is to provide areas for wholesaling, warehousing, storage,
manufacturing, processing, repair services, and sales lots in addition to other retail and service establishments; to expand or extend existing
districts only where there is adequate and direct access to major transportation facilities and where there is minimum conflict with residential
districts.
IV.7.2 Permitted uses. Development in the I district is limited to the following uses:
Any use permitted in the commercial zone districts.
Manufacturing.
Warehousing, wholesaling, shipping, and receiving.
Agriculture.
Petroleum bulk plant.
Junkyards, automobile salvage yards, or scrap metal processors. (Site plan approval, including landscape buffers and
fencing.)
Asphalt plants.
Cement, line gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacturing.
Fat rendering and fertilizer manufacturing.
Paper and pulp manufacturing.
Corrosive acid and alkali manufacturing, explosives.
Public utilities and buildings.
Tire reclamation facilities.
Cemeteries (site plan required).
Chemical plants.
Churches.
Solid waste collection, treatment and disposal facilities, and recycling operations.
Armories.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
209/240
s.
t.
u.
v.
w.
x.
y.
z.
a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Extraction or removal of sand, gravel, top soil, or other natural resources.
Grain elevators.
Hazardous waste facilities.
Lumber yards, planning and sawmills.
Petroleum refining and storage.
Septic tank cleaning services.
Commercial incinerators.
Uses similar to the above.
IV.7.3. Secondary uses permitted in I districts.
Wholesale and retail sales of products made in the plant or other subsidiaries.
Any combination of uses permitted unconditionally in I district.
IV.7.4. Accessory uses permitted in I districts.
Automobile parking lot or parking garage.
Storage warehouses.
Water towers.
Communication stations and towers.
Recreation facilities.
IV.7.5. Protective screening. Protective screening for requirements of I districts adjacent to or near residential districts shall be in
compliance with the regulations set forth in article III section 10.3.
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18.
ARTICLE	V.	-	OFF-STREET	PARKING	AND	LOADING	REQUIREMENTS
The intent of off-street parking requirements is to protect the public safety by minimizing the number of vehicles parked on road and
street easements and prevent excessive wear on the public roads and streets.
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 62.
Section	1.	-	Agricultural	uses.
Because it is assumed that agricultural land uses will be placed on a lot of sufficient size, all agricultural districts are exempt from any offstreet parking requirements.
Section	2.	-	Residential	uses.
One 300-square-foot parking space or driveway is required for every residential dwelling unit. In the event that the driveway intersects a
public drainage way, the developer must provide a culvert deemed suitable by the county road department for ensuring proper drainage
flow.
Section	3.	-	Commercial	uses.
Because success of a business may depend on the amount of parking available, the number of parking spaces that a commercial
establishment must provide is left to the discretion of the proprietor. However, the following requirements apply to all commercial business
establishments:
(50)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
210/240
V.3.1 Handicapped parking. There must be at least two handicapped parking spaces which are paved with a hard surface. From the
handicapped spaces a paved walkway of at least five feet in width must extend to the main entrance of the establishment. The size of each
handicapped parking space shall be no less than 13 feet in width and the length shall be consistent with all other parking spaces.
Handicapped spaces must be marked either on the pavement or by a sign at head of the space.
V.3.2 Ingress and egress. All ingress and egress to the parking areas must be paved with a hard surface, have a minimum width of at least
30 feet and a length of at least 40 feet.
V.3.3 Loading zones. All loading zones must be paved from entrance to exit.
Section	4.	-	Industrial	uses.
The following requirements apply to uses in all industrial districts:
V.4.1 Handicapped parking. There must be at least two handicapped parking spaces which are paved with a hard surface. From the
handicapped spaces a paved walkway of at least five feet in width must extend to the main entrance of the establishment. The size of each
handicapped parking space shall be no less than 13 feet in width and the length shall be consistent with all other parking spaces.
Handicapped spaces must be marked either on the pavement or by a sign at head of the space.
V.4.2 Ingress and egress. All ingress and egress to the parking areas must be paved with a hard surface, have a minimum width of at least
30 feet and a length of at least 40 feet.
V.4.3 Loading zones. All loading zones must be paved from entrance to exit.
V.4.4 Employee parking. All employees and visitors must park on the premises.
ARTICLE	VI.	-	MOBILE	HOME	AND	MOBILE	HOME	PARK	REGULATIONS
All mobile homes located within and outside of mobile home parks and all mobile home parks shall be governed by the regulations
within this ordinance. Mobile homes and mobile home parks within the city shall be located in the appropriate districts.
Section	1.	-	Requirements	for	all	mobile	homes.
The following regulations apply to all mobile homes regardless of location.
VI.1.1 Foundations. All main buildings shall be placed on a properly engineered foundation which meets the manufacturer's installation
requirements and applicable state and local requirements.
VI.1.2 Skirting. All mobile homes shall have exterior siding materials consisting of either wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or
metal lap. The exterior siding material shall extend to ground level, except that when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is
used, the siding material need not extend below the top of the foundation. (This provision shall be complied with within 30 days of
installation.)
VI.1.3 Unit orientation. The mobile home must be oriented on the lot so that its long axis is parallel with the street.
VI.1.4 Requirement for safety tie-downs. All manufactured homes shall be tied down in accordance to the table below unless the
manufacturer's installation requirements call for more or the home is placed on a lot that is in or adjacent to a flood hazard area:
Length	of
Manufactured
Home
(not	including
draw	bar)
Number	of	Vertical	Ties Number	of
Diagonal	Ties
Total	Number	of	Required
Anchors	per	Home
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
211/240
a.
b.
a.
a.
b.
c.
d.
a.
b.
0	to	40	feet 2 3  6
41	to	60	feet 3 5 10
61	to	84	feet 3 6 12
This table is based on a minimum working load per tie of 3,150 pounds with a 50 percent overload (4,725 pounds total).
Multiple-wide manufactured homes shall only be required to have diagonal ties and anchors in accordance with the chart
above unless the manufacturers installation instructions require more.
Single-section manufactured homes shall have diagonal and vertical ties and anchors in accordance with the chart above
unless manufacturer's instructions require more.
VI.1.5 Health; water and sewer system; regulations adopted. Prior to the allowance of permanent occupancy of a mobile home site within
the City of Unadilla, such mobile homes shall be connected with an approved water source and an approved sewage disposal system in such
a manner as to comply with the Georgia Department of Public Health and the Georgia Water Quality Control Board Regulations.
VI.1.6 Storage of mobile homes. The storage of any mobile home on a private lot, exclusive of a sales or manufacturer's lot, shall not
exceed 60 days. The stored mobile unit shall be affixed with a permit provided by the administrative assistant. The owner or agent of said
mobile home shall complete and file an affidavit with the administrative assistant indicating his/her knowledge of the terms of this regulation
and his/her affirmation that said mobile home is not permanently occupied by himself/herself, member of his family, or other persons.
VI.1.7 Permits required for accessory structures. Accessory structures shall require a building permit.
VI.1.8 Compliance. Manufactured homes which are to be moved into the City of Unadilla or relocated within the city must comply with
these provisions:
No used manufactured home being moved into the incorporated areas of City of Unadilla or being relocated within the
incorporated area of the city will be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy if said manufactured home
is more than 12 years' old.
Exception: The process to request permission to place or relocate a manufactured home that is more than 12 years' old
in the incorporated areas of the city is as follows:
The applicant submits a request for a variance to the zoning administrator.
The applicant pays a variance request/inspection fee of $75.00.
The Dooly County/City of Unadilla building inspector performs an inspection of the mobile home to determine the
home's compliance with state codes.
After receiving a recommendation from the county building inspector, the city zoning board will consider the variance
request and vote to either approve or deny the variance request.
(Ord. No. 10-5, 4-27-2010)
Section	2.	-	Requirements	for	mobile	home	parks.
The following regulations pertain to mobile home parks as defined in article II of this ordinance.
VI.2.1 Site development plan. Complete site development plans of the proposed mobile home park must be submitted to the city council.
Site development plans shall include at least the following items:
A site plan at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet.
The title under which the development is to be recorded, the legal description of the land to be developed, the name of
the present owner, and the name and address of the technical author of the plan.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
212/240
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
a.
b.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
a.
b.
c.
All property lines and dimensions; the location and dimensions of each building and unit.
The layout and location of off-street parking, total number of spaces, ingress and egress lanes, pedestrian ways,
sidewalks, and curblines.
The proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, and other data as may be required by the
planning commission to clearly indicate the general design of said utility services.
All proposed uses of the property and buildings to be developed shall be indicated on the plan.
Date, north point, and graphic scale.
VI.2.2 Expansion of existing mobile home parks. A person, firm, or corporation desiring to expand an existing mobile home park to
include more homes or mobile park sites that [than] are accommodated within such a park at the time this regulation is adopted shall submit
plans and specifications for such improvements to the city council for approval prior to initiating construction and improvements.
VI.2.3 Nonconforming mobile home parks. Any nonconforming mobile home park in the City of Unadilla which becomes vacant and
remains unoccupied due to abandonment or discontinuance for a period of six months shall not begin new operations until the park is
brought into full compliance with these regulations.
VI.2.4 Evidence of compliance. No mobile home shall be admitted to any mobile home park or allowed to be placed within the City of
Unadilla for a period exceeding 48 hours unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of the HUD federal requirements for
building construction.
VI.2.5 General development requirements for mobile home parks. Mobile home parks shall conform to the following general
requirements.
Minimum area: A mobile home park shall have as a minimum size two acres and shall front upon a highway or public
street.
Minimum number of spaces: A mobile home park shall have as a minimum four spaces prepared with all utilities in place
prior to its approval for occupancy.
Setback: A mobile home park shall be designed so that mobile homes (and travel trailers, if permitted) and their
accessory structures shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet from adjoining property lines, 20 feet from internal
park streets and at least 30 feet from any publicly dedicated street.
Access: The mobile home park shall front upon at least one publicly dedicated street. Each mobile home site and its
parking area shall have direct access to the internal street system of the park.
Streets: Streets within a mobile home park shall be either paved or graveled and shall be privately owned,
constructed, and maintained. Such private streets shall be well drained, with a minimum width surface of 12 feet for
one-way streets and 24 feet for two-way streets.
Parking: Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a minimum of one off-street parking space. The front yard
space for mobile homes may be used for the parking of motor vehicles; however, the side yard and rear yard space
may not be used for parking areas.
Density: A maximum of four mobile home stands per gross acre or 12 trailer (travel) stands per acre is allowed.
VI.2.5 [VI.2.6] Improvements required for mobile home stands. The following requirements must be in place prior to habitation of a
mobile home park:
Interior street access: Each stand shall be provided with access frontage of at least 25 feet for single-wide and 45 feet for
double-wide.
Electric power supply: Each stand shall be provided with a properly grounded waterproofed electrical receptacle with a
minimum rated capacity of 150 amperes. A properly sized over current device shall be installed as a part of each power
outlet.
Stand identification: A property and street number designation or other appropriate number device properly identifying
each mobile home stand shall be placed at the interior side lot line at a point ten to 15 feet from the interior road system
of the park. Such device shall be a minimum of six inches in height.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
213/240
a.
b.
c.
a.
b.
1.
2.
a.
b.
c.
ARTICLE	VII.	-	SIGN	REGULATIONS
It is the purpose of this section to permit signs of a commercial nature in districts in which they are appropriate uses and to regulate the
size, density, and placement of signs intended to be seen from the public right-of-way in the interest of highway safety and the general
welfare. For the purpose of the administration of the sign provisions of this ordinance, signs shall be interpreted as typical accessory uses in
their appropriate zoning districts. All signs within the area covered by these regulations shall be erected, constructed, or maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this section; and only those signs that are listed in this section shall be erected within said area.
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 46.
Section	1.	-	Safety	standards.
The following regulations are designed and intended to promote public safety while allowing private individuals the freedom to express
themselves, and present their business interest in a fair and reasonable manner.
VII.1.1 Traffic safety. No sign shall be erected or continued that:
Obstructs the sight distance along a public right-of-way.
Would tend by its location, color, or nature to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals.
Uses admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger," etc., which might be confused with traffic directional signals.
VII.1.2 Construction prohibited. No sign shall be attached to or painted on any street, rock, or other natural object nor shall any sign be
located on any public right-of-way.
VII.1.3 Density and setback requirements. Requirements for all signs, permitted or exempt from permit must follow density and setback
requirements.
Signs which do not require a permit shall be at least 10 feet from any right-of-way line unless said signs are less than
three feet in height above adjacent roadway grade or are located at least 12 feet above the adjacent finished roadway
grade.
Signs which require a permit:
Advertising incidental use signs, advertising separate use signs, point of business signs, identification signs and
bulletin boards shall be setback at least ten feet from any right-of-way line unless said signs are less than three feet
in height above adjacent roadway grade or are located at least 12 feet above the adjacent finished roadway grade.
No permit shall be issued for any advertising separate use sign within 100 feet of any residential district.
VII.1.4 Illumination not to be a nuisance. Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, floodlights or spotlights shall be so placed and
so shielded as to prevent the rays or illumination therefrom being cast into neighboring dwellings and approaching vehicles.
VII.1.5 Maximum area of signs. No freestanding sign shall be larger in area than 1,200 square feet per side, limit of two sign faces per
travel direction.
Section	2.	-	Sign	permitting.
The following regulations apply to the permitting requirements for signs established within the city limits of Unadilla.
VII.2.1 Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs shall not require a permit:
Signs to regulate traffic.
Signs required to be posted by law.
Warning signs and no trespassing signs.
(51)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
214/240
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
Signs established by governmental agencies.
Signs indicating bus stops, taxi stands, and similar transportation.
Signs not exceeding ten square feet in area advertising specific property for sale, lease, rent, or development on private
property.
Temporary real estate signs less than ten square feet in area advertising specific property for sale, lease, rent, or
development on private property.
Any sign not exceeding ten square feet in area other than advertising separate use signs or signs requiring electrical
wiring.
Temporary signs on private land involved in campaigns of religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, political, and similar
organizations.
Signs indicating the entrance of a residential subdivision.
VII.2.2 Issuance of permits. No sign, except those listed in section 7.5, shall be erected, hung, or placed or structurally altered without a
permit from the administrative assistant. The administrative assistant shall only issue a permit for the erection or construction of a sign which
meets the requirements of erection of this ordinance.
VII.2.3 Filing procedures. Application for permits to erect, hang, or place a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable from the
administrative assistant. Each application shall be accompanied by plans showing the area of the sign, size and character, and the method of
illumination, if any, and the exact location proposed for such sign and in the case of two projecting signs, the proposed method of fastening
said sign to the building structure, the vertical distance between such sign and the finished grade, and the horizontal distance between such
sign and the street right-of-way.
VII.2.4 Additional information. Each applicant shall, upon request of the administrative assistant, submit any additional information
deemed necessary by said administrator.
VII.2.5 Temporary signs. If a temporary sign which does not require a permit is not intended to be left in place for a period to exceed six
months, the owner may deposit a sum of $10.00 with the administrative assistant in lieu of the usual permit fee. If the sign is removed by the
owner before the first day of the seventh month, the deposit shall be refunded in full; if not, the deposit shall be forfeited, and the
administrative assistant shall have the city public works department remove said sign.
ARTICLE	VIII.	-	STRUCTURE	AND	PLACEMENT	REQUIREMENTS
The following regulations apply to the placement of structures within their corresponding zoning districts.
Minimum lot size standards. The purpose of the minimum lot size requirements of this ordinance is to accomplish three main tasks. The
first is to protect the public safety by maintaining adequate lot size in order to support particular water and sewer facilities on a lot or parcel.
The second task these regulations are intended to accomplish is to maximize efficiency which will in turn minimize the amount of revenue
needed to maintain certain public facilities. The third and final task is to mitigate the adverse impact that certain land uses may inflict on
neighboring properties.
Minimum lot width requirements. Minimum lot width requirements are intended to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the
general public by assuring sufficient spatial distribution in coordination with certain activities carried out in each particular land use district.
Front yard setback requirements. The front yard setback is defined in this ordinance as the distance between the principle land use and
the public easement for which it faces.
Side yard setback requirements. Side yard setbacks enable the passage of utility vehicles necessary to perform certain functions to
structures on a parcel of land or a neighboring parcel. In the event of fire, side yard setbacks are important to maintain a safe distance for
protection from the spread of the fire.
Rear yard setback requirements. Rear yard setbacks serve a purpose similar to that of side yard setbacks.
TABLE 1. SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS BY ZONING DISTRICT
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
215/240
Zoning
District
Minimum	Lot	Area
(Square	Feet)
Minimum	Lot	Width
(Feet)
Front	Yard
(Feet)
Side	Yard
(Feet)
Rear	Yard	
(Feet)
R-1 12,000 100 30 10 30
R-2 10,000 85 30 10 30
R-2	(TwoFamily)
10,000 75 25 10 30
R-2
(Multifamily)
3,300	per	d.u. 75 25 15 30
C-1 — 60 25 10 20
C-2 — 60 — — —
I — 100 50 30 —
AG 15,000 300 30 10 35
Note: Minimum lot area standards established are for lots within public water and public sewerage. Lots developed with only
public water require 20,000 square feet of area. Lots without public water or sewerage require one acre. (See health
department.)
ARTICLE	IX.	-	ADMINISTRATION,	ENFORCEMENT,	AND	AMENDMENT	PROCEDURES
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
Section	1.	-	Enforcement.
The administrative assistant of the city shall enforce this ordinance and is hereby given the authority and responsibility to enforce all
provisions of this ordinance, which includes, but is not limited to, the following duties:
IX.1.1 Map maintenance. It is the administrative assistant's duty to maintain in a timely and current manner the official zoning map
reflecting thereon any and all rezoning amendments approved by the mayor and city council. Amendments of this official zoning map will be
recorded by the zoning administrator within seven calendar days following approval of such action by the mayor and council.
IX.1.2 Sign regulation. It is the administrative assistant's duty to conduct the approval process and issue permits in accordance with the
sign regulations set forth in this ordinance.
IX.1.3 Development monitoring. It is the administrative assistant's duty to inspect all development within the city limits of Unadilla and
report any violations of this ordinance to both the mayor and council.
IX.1.4 Other duties. It is the administrative assistant's duty to perform any other zoning duties as directed by the mayor and council.
Section	2.	-	Permits.
(52)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
216/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
e.
f.
1.
2.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for or construction of any building structure or the moving of any existing
building without first obtaining a zoning permit from the administrative assistant. No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration,
or remodeling of any building or structure until an application has been submitted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance,
showing that the construction proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Section	3.	-	Fees.
Fees for inspections and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this
ordinance shall be collected by the administrative assistant in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. The amount of such
fees shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from the
enforcement of this ordinance.
Section	4.	-	Amendments.
The city council of the City of Unadilla may amend, supplement, or change the regulation of the district boundaries of this ordinance as
established herein.
IX.4.1 Policies and procedures for city initiated zoning activities. The following process applies when the city feels the need to amend the
text of the ordinance or the official zoning map.
In the case of developing an initial zoning plan (map and text), or updating or amending an existing zoning plan, the city
council will, where appropriate, utilize any new or existing land use studies, land use plans, or other relevant documents
as a resource for ordinance development or ordinance amendment.
Upon the completion of a preliminary zoning document(s) by the administrative assistant of the city and after this draft
document has been presented to and reviewed by the city council, a public hearing will be scheduled by the Unadilla City
Council, respectively. The public hearing will be held by the mayor and council, and public notice will be given no less than
15 days nor more than 45 days prior to the hearing date.
Public hearing notices will be published in The News Observer. The public notice will state the time, place, and purposes
of the hearing.
When the boundary lines of an established zoning district are proposed for change (rezoning), the city council shall have
the planning commission prepare an evaluation of each such proposed rezoning considering each of the following
factors:
Existing uses and zoning of nearby property.
The extent to which property values are diminished by the present zoning restrictions.
The extent to which the destruction of property values, resulting from existing zoning of specific parcels promotes
the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public.
The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner by the
proposed zoning classification.
The suitability of the subject property for the zoning purposes as proposed.
The length of time the property has been vacant under the present zoning classification, considered in the context
of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property.
Conformity with or divergence from the city's comprehensive plan.
The public hearing will be convened at the advertised time and place and will be presided over by the appropriate
officials.
At the public hearing, the mayor will review for those present the following operating procedures for the public hearing:
In order for a person in attendance to speak, the mayor must recognize him/her. The person recognized will identify
himself/herself. The mayor may also request that the person furnish a home or business street address, as
appropriate.
The person speaking will be allowed a reasonable amount of time to express opinions and make comments.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
217/240
3.
4.
g.
h.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
Additional persons will be recognized per the above procedure for the purpose of addressing additional concerns of th
make additional points with regard to elements already addressed but not to rehash points already made.
Appropriate notes or minutes will be recorded by the city council and the planning commission at their respective
public hearings.
In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem will preside over the mayor's duties.
The city council at its public hearing will review and consider the evaluations and recommendations from the planning
commission and may choose to adopt, reject, or modify the planning commission's recommendations or the business
may be tabled for additional study to the next regular council meeting.
IX.4.2 Procedures for rezoning request made by a private citizen or property owner. Either a resident of the city or one who owns
property within the city limits may request an amendment to either the text of this ordinance or the official zoning map. The following is the
procedure for which this may be accomplished:
An application for rezoning must be filed with the administrative assistant at city hall on a prescribed form and fees paid
as set by the city council.
All applications for rezoning requests will be accompanied by a plat of the parcel in question and a legal description. If
the parcel's boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within an existing subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the
land records of the county, then the lot, block, and subdivision designation with appropriate plat references and a copy of
the deed to the land so described as required above.
The administrative assistant will inform applicant of the public hearing date. A public hearing will be held by the city
council. Public notice will appear no less than 15 days nor more than 45 days of the official public hearing.
The public hearing notice will name the applicant, the location of the property to be affected, the present zoning class,
the proposed zoning class, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing to be held by the mayor and council.
The administrative assistant shall have erected upon the property for which rezoning is to be considered a sign of no less
than 17 inches by 24 inches announcing the public hearings, stipulating the dates, times, and places for the two hearings,
the present zoning class, and the proposed zoning class. The sign shall be clearly visible from a public street. It shall be
erected not less than 15 days before the official public hearing date.
The public hearing held will follow essentially the same meeting procedures as that of the city council, as provided for in
section VIII.4.2.
Following the public hearing, the application will be forwarded to the planning commission.
The planning commission shall recommend approval or disapproval which shall be forwarded to the city for final
determination.
Any application for rezoning of a particular parcel of property which is defined by the city council may not again be
considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least 12 months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning
request.
ARTICLE	X.	-	MUNICIPAL	PLANNING	COMMISSION
FOOTNOTE(S):
Cross reference— Authorities, boards, commissions, committees, § 2-111 et seq.
Section	1.	-	Creation	and	establishment.
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the City of Unadilla which will, in accordance with
existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as
efficiency and economy in the process of development, the Unadilla Planning Commission, herein referred to as the planning commission, is
hereby created and established.
Section	2.	-	Membership,	organization,	rules,	sta,	and	nances.
(53)
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
218/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
a.
b.
c.
d.
The planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the city, who are at least 18 years of age.
The mayor and each council member shall each appoint one member to the commission.
The terms of the members shall run concurrently with the term of office of the mayor or council member who appointed the
commission member.
Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by mayor or council member who appointed the vacant
member. The city council shall have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing.
All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their
official duties.
The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with
eligibility for re-election.
The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who maybe an officer or employee of the City of Unadilla.
The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting.
All meetings of the planning commission at which official action taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the
planning commission shall be a public record.
The planning commission, upon approval of the mayor and council, may contract with state planning agencies and city
planners and other consultants for such services as it may require.
The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purposes by
the city council.
Section	3.	-	Duties	and	powers.
It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing
conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote
public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of this
political jurisdiction. In particular, the commission shall have the power and the duty to:
Prepare a master plan or parts hereof for the development of its political jurisdiction.
Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council a zoning ordinance or resolution.
Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council regulations for the subdivision of land within its political
jurisdiction and to administer the regulations that may be adopted.
Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council a plat or plats of an official map showing the exact
location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened, or narrowed streets, public open spaces, or
public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines,
within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof.
In addition, unincorporated areas adjacent to municipalities may be added to and included in the area under the jurisdiction of the
planning commission for general planning and for master plan preparation and for the preparation and administration of zoning ordinances
or resolutions, land subdivision regulations, and official maps; provided, that the governing bodies of the county and municipality shall agree
to the boundaries of such additional areas, procedures for the adoption and administration or ordinances and resolutions, and regulations
applying to the area, and the manner of obtaining equitable representation on the planning commission. Such agreement shall be formally
established by appropriate official action by the governing authorities involved.
The planning commission may make, publish, and distribute maps, plans, reports, and recommendations relating to the plan and
development of its political jurisdiction to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, education, professional and other
organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials of its political jurisdiction programs for public
improvements and the financing thereof. All public officials shall, upon request, to the planning commission, within a reasonable time such
available information as it requires for its work. The planning commission, its members, and employees, in the performance of its functions,
may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon; provided,
however, that the planning commission shall be liable for any injury or damage to property resulting therefrom. In general, the planning
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
219/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
commission shall have powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote the planning of its political jurisdiction,
including the authority to enter into agreements with political subdivisions and planning commissions, by whatever name known, in adjacent
states.
ARTICLE	XI.	-	VARIANCE	AND	PLANNED	UNIT	DEVELOPMENT	PROCESS
The mayor and council of the City of Unadilla shall hear and decide upon all variances to the city's zoning ordinance. Variances may be
granted by the council at a regularly scheduled council meeting or properly advertised called public meeting.
Section	1.	-	Variance	process.
A variance applies to relaxing such requirements as minimum lot size, front, side, and rear setback requirements.
XI.1.1 Request for a variance. The city council may authorize in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not
be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an
individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety
and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for use of land or building or
structure that is prohibited by this ordinance in the district in question. Such variance may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by
the city council that the following exists:
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of
its size, shape, or topography; and
The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship; and
Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of these
regulations; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is
prohibited by this ordinance; and
A literal interpretation of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are
allowed; and
Provided that the city council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to
protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community and to protect the value and use of property in
the general neighborhood; and provided that where the city council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant
to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was
granted are not being complied with, said council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all
parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing.
XI.1.2 Forms. Applications for variances shall be made on forms provided by the administrative assistant and all information required on
said forms shall be provided by the applicant. Forms shall be filed with the administrative assistant, and the applicant shall pay the city for
expenses incidental to the variance. No form shall be accepted by the city unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by
the appropriate fee payable to the city to defray expenses.
XI.1.3 Appeals. The mayor and council of the City of Unadilla shall hear and decide appeals where there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative assistant in the enforcement of this ordinance.
Section	2.	-	Planned	unit	development	process.
The objective of the planned unit development is to encourage ingenuity, imagination, and flexibility of design efforts on the part of
builders, architects, site planners, and developers to produce land developments which are in keeping with density and open space objectives
of the zoning resolution while departing from the strict application of use, setback, height, and minimum lot size requirements of the zoning
ordinance. The intent of this section is to permit such flexibility and provide performance criteria for planned developments which:
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
220/240
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
b.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Permit a creative approach to the residential, commercial, and industrial development.
Provide for an efficient use of land potentially resulting in more economical networks of streets and utilities thereby
lowering housing and other land development costs.
Enhance the appearance of neighborhoods through the preservation of natural features, the provisions of recreation
areas, and open space.
Provide an environment of stable character compatible with surrounding agricultural, residential, commercial, or
industrial areas, and other areas of the city.
A planned unit development may incorporate a number of different land uses in many different ways. The uses within the
development must either be consistent with the current zoning application or clearly demonstrate to the mayor and council how
a particular nonconforming land use may exist within the development and not pose any adverse impacts upon the
development and the other land owners within the district. A planned unit development will be permitted on the basis of
whether or not it meets the planned unit development criteria listed in section XI.2.2.
Regardless of the development, the following standards must always apply:
The planned unit development shall have access to streets outside the development that can adequately serve the traffic
needs of the development. The planned unit development shall also be adequately served by water and sewerage
systems.
The minimum size of a planned unit development shall be five acres.
For the purpose of this ordinance, overall residential density for a planned unit development shall not exceed: One-family
dwelling unit - One unit per 7,000 square feet of land; Multifamily unit - One unit per 6,050 square feet of land.
XI.2.1 Planned unit development application procedure. An application for permitting a planned unit development, either residential,
commercial, industrial, or any combination of the three, shall be submitted to the administrative assistant of the city along with the following:
A written statement to accompany the application must contain the following information:
An explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the manner in which it has been planned to
take advantage of the planned unit regulations.
A statement of present ownership of all of the land included within the development.
A general indication of the expected schedule of development.
An official legal description of the total area within the planned unit development.
Preliminary development plan: An applicant shall submit a preliminary development plan along with the written
statement at the time of submission. The preliminary development plan must include all of the following information:
A preliminary site plan at the appropriate scale depicting all existing masses of trees and other natural features
including the topography of the land. A preliminary solution of all storm drainage needs shall be included.
The preliminary location and grouping of all uses and the amount of area for each plus preliminary utility service
plans.
The tentative location of each residential density district, the number of residential units proposed for each density
district, their general location, proposed lot designs, and district lines. Tentative floor plans and exterior elevations,
which need not be the result of final architectural decisions but which shall adequately describe the development.
A preliminary vehicular and pedestrian circulation system including driveways, walkways, loading areas, and parking
areas including the number of parking spaces and streets to be dedicated.
A system of open space and recreational uses in residential projects with estimates of acreage to be dedicated for
public use and that to be retained in common ownership.
A draft of the declaration by which the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development
and any of its common open space areas shall be submitted.
A development schedule indicating: (1) the approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to
begin, (2) the stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage can
be expected to begin, (3) the anticipated rate of development, (4) the approximate dates when the stages in the
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
221/240
a.
b.
c.
d.
a.
b.
c.
d.
development will be completed, and (5) the area and location of common open space that will be provided at each
stage.
XI.2.2 City council preliminary review. The mayor and council shall, after review by the appropriate city departments, hold a public
hearing, review the preliminary development plan, and may choose to adopt, reject, or modify the preliminary development plan or the
business may be tabled for additional study to the next regular council meeting. The city council's decision shall be based on the following:
The proposed planned unit development does not affect adversely the orderly development of the city as embodied in
the zoning resolution and in any comprehensive plan or portion thereof adopted by the mayor and council.
The proposed planned unit development will not affect adversely the health, safety, and welfare of residents or workers
in the area and will not be detrimental to the natural environment or to the use or development of adjacent properties or
the general neighborhood.
The proposed planned unit development will accomplish the objective and will meet the standards and performance
criteria as outlined in this ordinance.
The proposed planned unit development will not pose any undue social or financial burden upon the tax paying citizens
of the city.
The mayor and council may place conditions on their approval that require the applicant to modify the preliminary development
plan. Such conditions shall relate to the criteria listed above. If such conditions are not followed, final approval shall not be
granted.
XI.2.3 Preliminary approval. Once the mayor and council grant preliminary approval of a proposed planned unit development, the
applicant may proceed to install the proper infrastructure as depicted in the preliminary development plan. If it is for the purposes of
efficiency, the applicant may proceed to install other features of the development so long as they were mentioned as a priority in the
preliminary development plan. Structures and improvements not mentioned as priority in the preliminary development plan may not be
constructed until approval of the final development plan. After all required infrastructure is in place, the development site will be reviewed by
the appropriate city departments. Upon their approval, the applicant will be eligible to submit the final development plan to the planning
commission. Preliminary approval of a proposed planned unit development is valid for nine months past approval by the mayor and council.
The applicant may request an extension of this approval, if necessary. Upon receipt of a request by the applicant, the city council may extend
for six months the period for filing the final development plan.
XI.2.4. City council final review. Upon review of the final development plan, the city council shall, after the review by the appropriate city
departments, review the final development plan to see that it is in compliance with the preliminary development plan and may choose to
adopt, reject, or modify the development or the business may be tabled for additional study to the next regular council meeting. The mayor
and council may require changes in the final development plan which comply with the following criteria:
The revised plan contains the same or a fewer number of dwelling units or other structures and/or floor area, or
The open space is in the same general location and in the same general amount, or a greater amount, or
The buildings have the same or less number of stories and/or floor area, or
The roads and drives follow approximately the same course.
XI.2.5 Phased developments. The applicant for a proposed planned unit development is encouraged to divide a development into
separate phases. In the case of a properly phased planned unit development, there will be only one preliminary review and one application
fee. Final approval will be granted one phase at a time. The applicant will only be required to install the proper infrastructure for the active
phase. After final approval of the first active phase, there will be no sunset on the preliminary approval unless ownership of the development
is changed.
ARTICLE	XII.	-	INTERPRETATION,	APPLICATION,	VIOLATIONS,	VALIDITY	CONFLICT,	AND	EFFECTIVE	DATE
Section	1.	-	Interpretation,	purpose,	and	conict.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
222/240
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public safety, health, convenience, comforts, prosperity, and general welfare.
It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation, or permit previously adopted or
issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use
of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or
annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater
restriction the provisions of this ordinance shall control.
Section	2.	-	Violations	and	penalties.
Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imposition of the appropriate fine or by imprisonment in the discretion of the
recorder's court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Section	3.	-	Validity.
This ordinance and the various articles, sections, paragraphs, and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any article,
section, paragraph, or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the ordinance shall not be
affected thereby.
Section	4.	-	Conicting	provisions	repealed.
All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance, to the extent of such conflict and nor[not] further, are hereby
repealed.
Section	5.	-	Eective	date.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
and welfare of the people of the City of Unadilla and are hereby ordered to be given immediate effect from and after the date of its passage.
CODE	COMPARATIVE	TABLE	PRIOR	CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Prior Code, which are included herein. Sections of the Prior Code, not
listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances
adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table.
Prior	Code
Section
Section 
this	Code
2-4 2-53
2-5,	2-6 2-161,	2-162
2-16 2-31
2-17,	2-18 2-54,	2-55
2-39—2-50 2-131—2-142
3-1—3-16 6-1—6-16
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
223/240
3-20—3-28 6-41—6-49
3-35—3-45 6-81—6-91
3-50—3-65 6-121—6-136
4-1—4-4 10-1—10-4
4-6,	4-7 10-5,	10-6
4-15—4-23 10-31—10-39
4-27—4-29 10-61—10-63
5-1,	5-2 14-31,	14-32
5-3 14-61
6-1—6-11 22-2—22-12
7-4 2-2
8-2 30-1
9-4 34-31
9-5 26-101
9-6 10-7
9-7—9-9 26-131—26-133
10-2,	10-3 2-81,	2-82
10-5 2-83
10-21 2-3
11-2—11-7 42-3—42-8
11-9,	11-10 42-9,	42-10
11-12 42-11
11-19,	11-20 26-71,	26-72
11-22—11-25 46-31—46-34
12-6,	12-7 38-1,	38-2
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
224/240
12-15 38-3
13-1 50-31
13-3—13-11 50-32—50-40
13-16,	13-17 66-41,	66-42
13-19—13-23 66-44—66-48
13-30—13-33 50-71—50-74
14-1—14-5 18-31—18-35
14-7—14-15 18-37—18-45
14-25—14-28 2-271—2-274
14-29 2-191
14-30—14-37 2-211—2-218
14-51 18-36
14-54,	14-55 58-131,	58-132
14-56 58-61
14-57—14-68 58-91—58-102
14-75—14-86 2-241—2-252
16-1—16-11 54-1—54-11
16-15,	16-16 54-31,	54-32
16-20—16-35 54-61—54-76
16-40—16-45 54-101—54-106
17-2 62-1
18-1,	18-2 66-1,	66-2
18-4,	18-5 66-4,	66-5
18-6—18-10 66-7—66-11
18-12—18-15 66-13—66-16
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
225/240
18-20—18-23 34-32—34-35
18-30—18-41 34-51—34-62
19-1—19-17 18-71—18-87
CODE	COMPARATIVE	TABLE	ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the Prior Code which are included herein. Ordinances
adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the Prior Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since publication of the prior code,
and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.
Ordinance
Number
Date Section  Section
this	Code
97-R-5  6-24-1997(Res.) 66-14
97-R-7 (Res.) 66-12
12-16-1997(Ord.) 62-31
97-R-10 12-16-1997(Res.) 66-11
98-R-1  3-24-1998(Res.) 66-3
98-R-2  3-24-1998(Res.) 62-2
98-1  4-14-1998 66-17
98-3 10-13-1998 1,2 66-6
11-10-1998(Res.) 50-2
2001-2 11-26(1) 42-1
2001-5  9-27-2001 15-2—15-9 26-31—26-38
2003-1  5- 1-2003 1—5 58-31—58-35
2003-3  7-24-2003 2-51
2003-2  8-12-2003 11-26(2) 42-2
2005-1  5-24-2005 adopt.	ord.
2005-2  5-24-2005  	 	 Added 54-141—54-144
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
226/240
2005-3  5-24-2005 1 	 	 Added 38-4
2005-4  5-24-2005 2 58-100
2005-06 12-14-2005 1 66-11(a)
2005-07 11-12-2005 1 50-36(1)c.
2 50-73
2006-1  1-10-2006 1 6-3
2 6-7(h)
3 6-17
4 6-121—6-128
2006-04-A  3-28-2006 1,	2 26-31—26-39
2006-04-B  7-25-2006 1,	2 26-31
3 26-32(4)
4 26-32(6)
5 26-32(8)—(10)
6 26-33(a)
7 26-33(b)(1)
8 26-33(c)(14)
9 26-33(d)
10 26-34(b)(2)
11 26-34(b)(5)
12 26-34(c)(1)
13 26-34(d)(2)
14 26-36(c)
2006-05  3-28-2006 14-31
2006-09  5-15-2006  	 	 Added 62-41—62-44
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
227/240
2006-10 10-10-2006 10-31—10-54
2006-11 10-10-2006 1 26-141—26-149
2006-12 10-10-2006 26-134
2006-13 12-28-2006 1 6-7(f)
2008-1  1-22-2008 1 	 	 Added 18-90—18-108
2 	 	 Added 6-18
2009-3  8-11-2009 Art.	1,
§§	A—D 	 	 Added 31-1—31-4
Art.	2,
§§	A—H 	 	 Added 31-5—31-12
Art.	3,
§§	A—C 	 	 Added 31-21—31-23
Art.	4,
§§	A—G 	 	 Added 31-31—31-37
Art.	5 	 	 Added 31-41
Art.	6 	 	 Added 31-13
2010-1  1-26-2010 Div.	1,
§§	1—12 	 	 Added 2-291—2-302
Div.	2,
§§	1—7 	 	 Added 2-311—2-317
10-2  4-13-2010 1 6-43(b)
10-3  4-27-2010 1(Art.	I,
§§	1—4) 	 	 Added 18-121—18-124
1(Art.	II,
§§	5—7) 	 	 Added 18-141—18-143
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
228/240
1(Art.	II,
§§	7—11) 	 	 Added 18-144—18-148
10-4  4-27-2010 1 66-2
2 66-11(a)(2)
10-5  4-27-2010  	 	 Added App.	A,	§	VI.1.8
10-6  5-11-2010  	 	 Added 62-4
11-1  1-11-2011 1 	 	 Added 66-18
11-2  3- 8-2011 1—4 	 	 Added 2-4
11-3  4-12-2011 1 	 	 Rpld 26-101
26-131—26-134
2(Exh.	A) 	 	 Added 26-101—26-110,
26-113—26-128,
26-131—26-136
3 	 	 Rnbd Ch.	26,	Art.	VI
 	 	 as Ch.	26,	Art.	V
2011-4  5-24-2011 I—X 	 	 Rpld 26-31—26-39
 	 	 Added 26-31—26-40
2011-6  8-23-2011 1(1)—(3) 6-7(b),	(c)
(f)
1(4) 6-7(note)
2011-7 11-15-2011 1 66-10
STATE	LAW	REFERENCE	TABLE
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of
Georgia Annotated.
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
229/240
O.C.G.A.
Section
Section 
this	Code
1-1-7 1-3
1-3-1 1-5
1-3-1	et	seq. 1-5
1-3-1(3) 1-2
1-3-2 1-2
1-5
1-3-3 1-2
1-5
26-33
66-18
1-4-1 1-2
1-4-6,	1-4-7 Ch.	38
2-10-105 18-37
3-1-1	et	seq. Ch.	6
3-3-20(b)(B) 6-124
3-4-3 Ch.	46
4-3-1	et	seq. Ch.	10
4-5-1	et	seq. Ch.	10
4-8-6 Ch.	10
4-8-20	et	seq. Ch.	10
4-8-28 10-63
4-11-1	et	seq. Ch.	10
5-3-29 26-125
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
230/240
5-4-1 31-41
tit.	8,	ch.	2 26-102
8-2-25(a) Ch.	30
8-2-50	et	seq. Ch.	14
Ch.	18
Ch.	30
8-2-200	et	seq. Ch.	30
9-11-6 1-2
1-5
10-14-1	et	seq. Ch.	22
12-2-8 26-34
12-4-72 26-33
12-5-1	et	seq. Ch.	66
12-5-20 26-32
26-33
26-38
12-5-23(5)(a) 26-35
12-5-30(f) 26-32
26-34
12-5-120	et	seq. Ch.	34,	Art.	II
Ch.	66
12-5-440	et	seq. 26-32
ch.	12-7 26-32
12-7-1	et	seq. 26-34
12-7-6 26-33
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
231/240
12-7-6(b) 26-33
12-7-6(c) 26-34
12-7-7(e) 26-36
12-7-7(f)(1) 26-35
12-7-7.1 26-33
12-7-8(a) 26-35
26-36
12-7-17(9) 26-35
12-7-17(10) 26-35
12-7-19(b)(1) 26-38
12-7-19(b)(4) 26-38
12-7-20 26-35
26-38
12-8-2 26-32
Ch.	66
12-8-20	et	seq. Ch.	50
50-1
12-8-22 	 	 App.	A,	Art.	II,	§	2
12-8-31.1 Ch.	50
50-1
12-8-40.1,
12-8-40.2
Ch.	50
12-8-60	et	seq. Ch.	50
12-9-1	et	seq. Ch.	26
15-21-73 1-12
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
232/240
15-21-93 1-12
15-21-100 1-12
15-21-112 1-12
tit.	16,	ch.	13,	art.	2 	 	 26-102
16-1-1	et	seq. Ch.	42
16-7-20	et	seq. Ch.	22
16-7-25 30-1
Ch.	54
16-7-40	et	seq. Ch.	50
16-10-23 Ch.	30
16-10-24.1 Ch.	30
16-10-27 Ch.	30
16-11-34 54-12
Ch.	62
16-11-36 42-1
16-11-43 Ch.	54
16-11-103 42-7
16-11-105 42-7
16-12-4 Ch.	10
16-12-37 Ch.	10
17-6-11 1-12
Ch.	62
17-10-3(e) 1-12
21-1-1 Ch.	46
tit.	25,	ch.	2 26-102
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
233/240
25-2-1	et	seq. Ch.	30
25-2-40 Ch.	30
25-3-1	et	seq. Ch.	30
25-3-4 Ch.	30
25-4-1	et	seq. Ch.	30
25-6-1	et	seq. Ch.	30
25-7-1	et	seq. Ch.	30
25-10-1	et	seq. Ch.	30
25-11-1	et	seq. Ch.	30
26-2-160 Ch.	10
26-2-373 Ch.	34
27-4-30	et	seq. Ch.	10
27-5-4	et	seq. Ch.	10
30-3-1	et	seq. Ch.	14
Ch.	18
31-1-1	et	seq. Ch.	34
31-3-4(a)(4) Ch.	34
31-3-5.2 66-18
31-3-6 Ch.	34
31-7-12 	 	 App.	A,	Art.	II,	§	2
31-19-1	et	seq. Ch.	10
31-19-4,
31-19-5
Ch.	10
31-27-1	et	seq. 42-10
32-1-1	et	seq. Ch.	54
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
234/240
32-1-8 Ch.	54
32-4-1	et	seq. Ch.	54
32-4-90	et	seq. Ch.	54
32-4-92 Ch.	54
32-6-1	et	seq. Ch.	54
32-6-50	et	seq. Ch.	46
32-6-51 Ch.	46
32-6-70	et	seq. Ch.	46
46-31
33-3-5 58-31
33-3-5(1) 58-34
33-8-4 58-33,	58-34
33-8-8.1 Ch.	58,	Art.	II
58-33
33-8-8.2 Ch.	58,	Art.	II
58-34
35-8-1	et	seq. Ch.	38
35-8-20 Ch.	38
35-9-1	et	seq. Ch.	38
36-1-11 Ch.	2,	Art.	III
36-1-11.1 Ch.	2,	Art.	III
36-1-16 Ch.	50
36-1-20(a) 31-1
36-1-21(a) Ch.	2,	Art.	III
36-5-22 Ch.	2,	Art.	III
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
235/240
36-18-1 26-33
36-30-8 1-12
36-30-9 Ch.	38
36-30-10 Ch.	54
36-32-1(a) Char.	Art.	IV
36-32-1(c) 1-12
36-33-3 Ch.	38
36-33-4 Ch.	2,	Art.	III
36-34-2(2),
36-34-2(4)
Ch.	2,	Art.	III
36-34-2(7) Ch.	66
36-34-3 Ch.	54
36-34-5 Ch.	66
36-34-6 2-271
36-35-4 Ch.	2,	Art.	III
36-35-6(5) Ch.	58,	Art.	V
36-35-6(a)(2) 1-12
Ch.	42
36-35-6(a)(5) Ch.	66
36-37-6 2-251
36-39-1	et	seq. Ch.	54
54-31
36-39-7 Ch.	66
36-40-20	et	seq. Ch.	66
36-43-1	et	seq. Ch.	46,	Art.	II
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
236/240
36-60-4 Ch.	26
36-60-6 Ch.	18,	Art.	II
36-61-11 Ch.	14
Ch.	18
Ch.	26
36-66-1	et	seq. App.	A
36-66-2 App.	A
36-67A-1	et	seq. App.	A
36-72-1	et	seq. Ch.	22
36-82-1	et	seq. 2-271
36-82-60	et	seq. RL	§	6,
RL	§	7
RL	§	11
RL	§	12
RL	§	17
RL	§	21
40-1-1 62-1
40-1-1(46) Ch.	38
40-6-1	et	seq. Ch.	62
62-1
40-6-2—40-6-395 	 	 62-1
40-6-7 54-12
Ch.	62
40-6-14 Ch.	26
Ch.	26,	Art.	III
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
237/240
40-6-76 54-12
Ch.	62
40-6-183 Ch.	62
62-31
40-6-200	et	seq. Ch.	62
40-6-206 Ch.	26
40-6-220	et	seq. Ch.	62
40-6-247,	
40-6-248
Ch.	30
40-6-249 Ch.	50
40-6-253.1 Ch.	50
40-6-290	et	seq. Ch.	62
40-6-371 Ch.	62
40-6-371(a)(1) Ch.	62
40-6-371(a)(3) 54-12
Ch.	62
40-6-372 Ch.	62
62-1
40-6-372—40-6-376 	 	 62-1
40-6-376 62-31
40-6-395 Ch.	38
40-8-70(b) Ch.	62
40-8-71(c) Ch.	26
Ch.	26,	Art.	III
40-11-1	et	seq. Ch.	26
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
238/240
40-13-1	et	seq. Ch.	62
40-13-3 Ch.	62
40-13-21(a) 1-12
Ch.	62
40-14-1—40-14-16 	 	 62-2
tit.	41,	ch.	39A 26-125
41-1-1	et	seq. Ch.	26
Ch.	26,	Art.	III
41-2-5 Ch.	26
Ch.	26,	Art.	III
41-2-7 Ch.	14
Ch.	18
Ch.	26
26-102
41-2-7	et	seq. 26-125
41-2-8 26-102
41-2-9	et	seq. Ch.	14
Ch.	18
Ch.	26
41-2-9—41-2-17 26-102
41-2-9(b)(1),	(2) 26-125
tit.	43 18-38
43-12-1 Ch.	18,	Art.	III
43-17-1	et	seq. Ch.	18,	Art.	III
43-32-1	et	seq. Ch.	18,	Art.	III
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
239/240
43-32-6 Ch.	18,	Art.	III
43-46-1	et	seq. Ch.	18,	Art.	III
44-1-13 Ch.	26
44-5-60 App.	A
45-2-5 Ch.	2,	Art.	III
45-10-3 Ch.	2,	Art.	IV
45-11-1 1-7
45-19-20	et	seq. Ch.	2,	Art.	III
45-20-90	et	seq. Ch.	2,	Art.	III
45-22-1	et	seq. Ch.	2,	Art.	III
45-23-1	et	seq. Ch.	2,	Art.	III
46-8-197 Ch.	62
47-5-1	et	seq. Ch.	2,	Art.	III
47-17-60	et	seq. 1-12
47-18-1	et	seq. Ch.	2,	Art.	III
47-20-1	et	seq. Ch.	2,	Art.	III
tit.	48,	ch.	4 26-125
48-2-40 18-43
48-4-78 26-125
26-127
48-5-350	et	seq. Ch.	58
48-5-355,
48-5-356
18-37
48-5-358 Ch.	54
48-6-93 18-37
8/30/2019 Unadilla, GA Code of Ordinances
240/240
Ch.	58,	Art.	III
58-61
48-6-93(d) 58-61
48-13-7 18-34
48-13-9 18-33
48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) 	 	 18-31
48-13-50	et	seq. Ch.	58,	Art.	IV
48-13-51(a)(1) 58-100
50-8-7.3 Ch.	2,	Art.	IV,
Div.	2
Ch.	50
50-17-1 RL	§	21
50-18-71	et	seq. 18-41
51-2-7 Ch.	10
51-7-1	et	seq. Ch.	38
51-7-20	et	seq. Ch.	38
51-7-40 Ch.	38