THE CODE OF THE CITY OF COLBERT, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Chris Peck 
Mayor 
____________ 
Roger Fortson 
Bert Robinson 
Evelyn Power 
Tim Wyatt 
City Council 
____________ 
John Waggoner 
City Advisor 
____________ 
Dale Perry 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Vicky Smith 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Colbert, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Mary Margaret Bielby, Code Attorney, and Erin McDaniel, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Vicky Smith, Dale Perry, and John Waggoner for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Colbert, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Colbert, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Colbert, Georgia. 2019. 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted by 1950 Ga. Laws (Act No. 648), page 2417. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Any provisions regarding the title, enactment date, severability, repealer, transitional language, ratification date, publication date or effective date of the ordinance have been omitted. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. The same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used as it appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 0.10. - Incorporation. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia and it is hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the passage of this Act the inhabitants of the territory now embraced in the corporate limits of the City of Colbert, located in the County of Madison, State of Georgia, be and are hereby incorporated under the name and style of "City of Colbert." 
ARTICLE I. - POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
The City of Colbert, in Madison County, Georgia, is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Colbert, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 1.10) 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the earliest effective date in 2005 of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Colbert, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 1.11) 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this Charter; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by title 48 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 48] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, public grounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, other public utilities, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 22] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, and the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 1.12) 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 1.13) 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The city council established in this Charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. Those persons serving as members of the city council on the effective date of this Charter shall serve the remainder of their terms in office and until their successors are elected and qualified. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.10) 
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The term of office of each member of the city council shall begin on the first Monday of January immediately following the election of such member. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.11; 2013 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), § 1, p. 3994, section 2.11) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon such person's failing or ceasing to reside in the city or upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 45], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election as provided for in section 5.14 of this Charter and Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. titles 21 and 45] or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.12) 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.13) 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Except as authorized by law, no councilmember nor the mayor shall hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which that person was elected. 
(c)  No councilmember nor the mayor shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which that person is financially interested. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.14) 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.15) 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.16) 
Sec. 2.17. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first Monday of January in each year. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.17) 
Sec. 2.18. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1] or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.18) 
Sec. 2.19. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.19) 
Sec. 2.20. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any councilmember shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers or in case of a tie two councilmembers and the mayor shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. An abstention shall be counted as an affirmative vote. On all questions before the city council, the mayor, or mayor pro tempore if he or she be presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.20) 
Sec. 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Colbert …" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.21) 
Sec. 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.22) 
Sec. 2.23. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers or in case of a tie two councilmembers and the mayor shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.23) 
Sec. 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of section 2.21 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.25 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.24) 
Sec. 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Colbert, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.25) 
Sec. 2.26. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the mayor's election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit that office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.26; 2013 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), § 2, p. 3995, section 2.26) 
Sec. 2.27. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative power granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.27) 
Sec. 2.28. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Appoint and remove all officers, department heads, and employees of the city except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(3)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the councilmembers a recommended operating budget and capital budget; 
(5)  Submit to the councilmembers at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and from time to time such other information as the councilmembers may request; 
(6)  Recommend to the councilmembers such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as the mayor may deem expedient; 
(7)  Call special meetings of the councilmembers as provided for in subsection (b) of section 2.18 of this Charter; 
(8)  Approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in section 2.29 of this Charter; 
(9)  Provide for an annual audit of all accounts of the city; 
(10)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever the mayor deems it expedient; 
(11)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this Charter, or ordinance; 
(12)  Participate in the discussion of all matters brought before the councilmembers; and 
(13)  Sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.28) 
Sec. 2.29. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the councilmembers shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor after its adoption. 
(b)  The mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the city clerk with or without the mayor's approval or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the councilmembers through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the councilmembers at their next meeting. If the councilmembers then or at their next meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of three members, it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the councilmembers over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the councilmembers as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the councilmembers as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.29) 
Sec. 2.30. - Mayor pro tempore; selection; duties. 
By a majority vote, the councilmembers shall elect annually at its organizational meeting a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the councilmembers and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's physical or mental disability or absence. The councilmembers by a majority vote shall elect a new presiding officer from among its members for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 2.30) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointed officers and directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointed officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the mayor unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 3.10) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this Charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All members of boards, commissions, or authorities of the city serve at will and may be removed at any time by the mayor unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 3.11) 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The mayor shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; and shall advise the councilmembers, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict, the city attorney shall advise the mayor. The city attorney shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 3.12) 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The mayor shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 3.13) 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The mayor shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 3.15) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Colbert. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 4.10) 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law; provided, however, that the bar membership requirement shall not apply if such person is the probate judge of Madison County and is appointed to serve as a judge of the municipal court only in cases of traffic law violations of which the municipal court has jurisdiction. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.19 of this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 4.11) 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 4.12) 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 4.13) 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Madison County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 4.14) 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 4.15) 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 21, chapter 2], the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 5.10) 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election annually on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 2.11 and 2.26 of this Charter, at the general municipal election in 2013, there shall be elected the mayor and two councilmembers to succeed the persons whose terms of office expire in January next following such election who shall be elected to two-year terms of office. At the general municipal election in 2015 and every four years thereafter, there shall be elected the mayor and two councilmembers to succeed those persons whose terms of office expire in January next following such election who shall be elected to four-year terms of office. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2.11 of this Charter, at the general municipal election in 2014, there shall be elected two councilmembers to succeed those persons whose terms expire in January next following such election who shall be elected to three-year terms of office. At the general municipal election in 2017 and every four years thereafter, there shall be elected two councilmembers to succeed those persons whose terms of office expire in January next following such election who shall be elected to four-year terms of office. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 5.11; 2013 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), § 3, p. 3995, section 5.11) 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 5.12) 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by majority vote. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 5.13) 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in section 2.12 of this Charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 21, chapter 2], the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 5.14) 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 21, chapter 2], the 'Georgia Election Code.' 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 5.15) 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  A councilmember, the mayor, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 45] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Madison County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Madison County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Colbert. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 5.16) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 34A) 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 1, p. 3909, section 34A) 
Sec. 6.11.a. - Exemption granted. 
The governing authority of the City of Colbert may grant an exemption from city ad valorem taxes on a homestead owned and occupied by a resident of the city as a residence and homestead, and only so long as actually occupied by the owner primarily as such, in an amount to be fixed by the governing authority at not more than $6,000.00 of its value. The governing authority of the city may by ordinance provide the procedures and requirements necessary for the proper administration of this exemption. The exemption granted to the homestead by this section shall extend to and shall apply to those properties, the legal title to which is vested in one or more titleholders, if actually occupied by one or more such owners as a residence. In such instances, such exemptions shall be granted to such properties, if claimed in the manner required by the city by one or more of the owners actually residing on such property. Such exemptions shall also extend to those homesteads, the title to which is vested in an administrator, executor, or trustee, if one or more of the heirs or cestui que uses residing on such property shall claim the exemption granted by this section in the manner required by the city. There shall be no more than one exemption per homestead. The exemption provided in this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1983. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 353), § 2, p. 4183, section 34A; 2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 2, p. 3909, section 34A) 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.12) 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business in this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.13) 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.14) 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.15) 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.16) 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.17) 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.18) 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.19) 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.20) 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.21) 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13], or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.22) 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.23) 
Sec. 6.24. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. The city council shall also comply with the budgeting and auditing provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 36, chapter 81]. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.24) 
Sec. 6.25. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget provided for in section 6.29 of this Charter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.25) 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The councilmembers may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the last day of each fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.24 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.26) 
Sec. 6.27. - Levy of taxes. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.27) 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.28) 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.23 of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal 18 year not later than the last day of each fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. 
Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.29) 
Sec. 6.30. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.30) 
Sec. 6.31. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.19 of this Charter. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.31) 
Sec. 6.32. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.32) 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 6.33) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 7.10) 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 7.11) 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 7.12) 
Sec. 7.13. - Construction and definitions. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word 'shall' is mandatory and the word 'may' is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, the term: 
(1)  'City council' means the members of the city council and the mayor. 
(2)  'Councilmember' means a member of the city council other than the mayor. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 7.13) 
Sec. 7.14. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 276), § 3, p. 3909, section 7.14) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 1950 Ga. Laws (Act No. 648), page 2417. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; incorporation of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The general ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Colbert, Georgia" and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "Colbert City Code" or "The Code of Colbert, Georgia." 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and interpretations. 
(a)  In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Colbert. 
City or municipality. The term "city" or "municipality" means the City of Colbert, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, City of Colbert, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Colbert. 
Council, city council, governing body, governing authority, or mayor and council. The term "council" "city council" "governing body" "governing authority" or "mayor and council" means the mayor and council of the City of Colbert. 
County. Whenever the term "county," "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to Madison County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court provided by law, or the court the city contracts with to handle such matters, for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" or the name or title of any other municipality officer means the mayor or such named officer of the City of Colbert. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Colbert" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the mayor and council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
State. Whenever the term "state," "the state" or "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. 
(b)  The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
(c)  All acts required or prohibited to be done by these ordinances or future legislation of the city, shall be understood and construed to be acts required or within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  All amendments to the Charter, or to any existing ordinance, or to such legislation as may be hereafter adopted, shall be as soon as regularly adopted by the city council a part of the ordinance and law of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(2)) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment, or any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the city court. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid because of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading to any chapter, article or division. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, Charter references, related law references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(c)  An ordinance which is in conflict in its entirety with a subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed in its entirety, even if no specific repealer is stated. If an ordinance is only partially in conflict with a subsequent ordinance, only the portion of the previous ordinance in conflict with the subsequent ordinance shall be deemed to have been repealed, even if a specific repealer is not stated. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, subsections, and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances or resolutions passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ___ of The Code of Colbert, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Colbert, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ___, which section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance or resolution. 
Sec. 1-8. - Interpretation of Code. 
In all interpretations of this Code, and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-9. - Substantive compliance with Code. 
Substantive compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures for any city officer or city employee; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a planning commission, including joint commissions; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city; 
(14)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein; 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-14. - Rates, charges and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 1-15. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and city council. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; administrative powers generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Annexation dispute process. 
Annexation disputes shall conform with state law. 
(Ord. of 6-22-1998, § 6) 
State Law reference— Annexation procedure, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BODY 

Sec. 2-21. - Meetings of the mayor and council. 
(a)  Mayor and council shall meet on the first Monday night of each month in a regular meeting which shall be held in the city hall or at such other place as the members may designate. The meeting shall be held at 7:00 p.m. local time. The mayor, any council person, or any citizen who wishes to have an item discussed at the regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council shall notify the city clerk no later than 12:00 noon on the Wednesday immediately preceding said city council meeting of their desire to discuss such a topic at the upcoming meeting. The city clerk shall prepare an agenda based upon these requests and shall forward each member of the city council a copy of this agenda no later than 12:00 noon on the Friday immediately preceding the meeting. No matter may be discussed at a city council meeting unless it is on this agenda unless the mayor and council unanimously vote to approve the discussion of such a matter. 
(b)  The mayor or any three city councilmembers may call a special meeting with the same power and authority as a regular meeting. However, either the mayor or the three city councilmembers must give the city clerk at least four days' notice of their intent to call a special meeting and the city clerk shall give each councilmember at least two days' notice of such a city council meeting and the agenda of such a meeting. The city clerk shall attempt to provide notice of any special meeting of the city council in the official organ of the county and if such organ will not publish between the time that the special meeting is called and the time of the special meeting, the city clerk shall notify the Athens Daily News or some other daily newspaper operating from Athens of the intent to have such a special meeting. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(4), § 1; Ord. of 2-4-1991, § 1) 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Secs. 2-22—2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-46. - Tax assessors. 
The taxing officials of the county are hereby designated to have the responsibility for assessment and valuation of property within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(12)) 
Secs. 2-47—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-66. - City parks and recreation department. 
The parks and recreation department of the county is hereby designated as the parks and recreation department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 70, 5-3-1971) 
State Law reference— Authority, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-67—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-91—2-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-107. - Created and established. 
The county planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 (Act No. 358 as amended) and said planning commission shall be organized and empowered as provided in the following sections. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1970, intro. ¶) 
Sec. 2-108. - Membership. 
The county planning commission shall consist of nine members. One of the members shall be a resident of the City of Colbert appointed by the mayor and council. One of the members shall be a resident of the City of Hull appointed by the mayor and city council. One of the members shall be a resident of the City of Comer appointed by the mayor and city council. One of the members shall be a resident of Carlton appointed by the mayor and council. One of the members shall be a resident of the City of Ila appointed by the mayor and city council. One of the members shall be a resident of the City of Danielsville appointed by the mayor and city council and three of the members shall be residents of the county appointed by the county commissioners. The terms of the members shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the first county planning commission under the terms of this division one of the city-appointed members shall be appointed for a term of one year and two for a term of three years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council which shall also have the authority to remove any city-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1970, § 1) 
Sec. 2-109. - Organization, rules, staff, and finances. 
The county planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the municipality or the county. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing authorities of the city and the county. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1970, § 2) 
Sec. 2-110. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then said planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 (Act No. 358 as amended). 
(Ord. of 8-8-1970, § 3) 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VIDEO ARCADES 

Sec. 4-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Game room means any establishment wherein more than two video, electronic or mechanical devices are used for the playing of games or recreation, for a charge. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 1, 7-12-1982) 
Sec. 4-20. - Intent. 
It is the intention of the mayor and council, in enacting the ordinance from which this article is derived regulating video, electronic or mechanical devices used for the playing of games or recreation for a charge located within the city, that the city not become a center for truancy and to encourage school attendance. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 2, 7-12-1982) 
Sec. 4-21. - Business license required. 
A video, electronic or mechanical device used for the playing of games or recreation for a charge shall only be operated after payment of the license fee as hereinafter set forth. Each video, electronic or mechanical device used for the playing of games or recreation located within the city shall have an annual license fee of $25.00 per calendar year payable on the date each machine is installed. This business license fee is also applicable to those businesses not defined as a game room as set forth in section 4-19. The annual license fee shall be paid without prorating the fee regardless of when during a calendar year a machine is installed. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 3, 7-12-1982) 
Sec. 4-22. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a game room between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. or to permit any person to remain in a game room between said prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. It shall be unlawful to operate any game room on Sunday in the city. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 4, 7-12-1982) 
Sec. 4-23. - Lighting and maintenance requirements. 
A game room or establishment in which there is located video, electronic or mechanical devices used for the playing of games or recreation for a charge shall be well lighted and shall not permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions to be used to prevent a clear view of the interior, which clear view must be maintained at all times. This provision, however, shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes, nor the maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5, 7-12-1982) 
Sec. 4-24. - Adult attendant. 
An adult attendant shall be in attendance at a game room at all times when same is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 6, 7-12-1982) 
Sec. 4-25. - School hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who has not reached the age of 17 years to play games or to be permitted to remain in the game room for any purpose during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, while the county school system is in session. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 7, 7-12-1982) 
Sec. 4-26. - Gambling, drinking and drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any gambling, drinking of alcoholic beverages or use of drugs to be allowed or conducted on the premises of a game room. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 8, 7-12-1982) 
Sec. 4-27. - Punishment for violation. 
Any owner of a game room or establishment in which there is located video, electronic or mechanical devices used for the playing of games or recreation for a charge or any of the agents or employees of any game room or establishment in which there is located video, electronic or mechanical devices used for the playing of games or recreation for a charge, who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by revocation of the license of the owner to operate video, electronic or mechanical devices used for the playing of games or recreation for a charge within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 9, 7-12-1982) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; sterilization of dogs and cats in shelters, O.C.G.A. § 4-14-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Dogs and livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any livestock including chickens in the city limits, except it be in droves en route of travel in care of the owner or owner's agent, to run at large upon the streets of the city. Any person allowing such stock and chickens to run at large or be kept on his premises shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and, on conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in section 4.13 of the Charter and fined according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(10)) 
Sec. 6-2. - Animal control. 
The mayor and council hereby adopt the animal control ordinance of the county as it presently exists or may be amended in the future, with the same force and effect as if recited in full herein. Any provisions in the county ordinance setting out "Madison County" or "county" are amended to read "City of Colbert" or "city" where appropriate. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Secs. 6-3—6-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means any place other than the premises of the owner, except where the animal is confined by a leash, chain, cord or similar restraint, or confined to a motor vehicle. 
Dog means any member of the dog family ( canidae ), both male and female, singular and plural. 
Officer means any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by the mayor to enforce this article. 
Owner means any person who exercises ownership, control or custody of a dog, including allowing a dog to spend large amounts of time on property controlled by the person, whether said property is leased, rented, owned or occupied free of charge by the owner, or any person who regularly feeds and/or waters any dog. 
(Ord. of 10-7-1996) 
Sec. 6-24. - Impoundment of stray dogs and unvaccinated dogs. 
(a)  The chief of police or any other official designated to enforce this article shall, upon observing a dog within the city limits cross from the lands controlled by one person to the lands of another, or upon seeing a dog on the public streets, alleys, parks, common areas, railroad property or upon any property not that of the owner of the dog, or otherwise at large, shall be authorized to seize that dog and impound the dog in such place of safe keeping as may be designated from time to time by the mayor. 
(b)  The chief of police or any other official so designated to enforce this article shall be authorized to seize and impound any dog in the city limits, regardless of where it may be found or upon the land of any person, either the owner of the dog or not, which does not have attached proof of rabies vaccination. 
(c)  If the owner of the dog is known, the city clerk shall notify such owner of the impoundment by certified mail, return receipt requested, within 72 hours of such impoundment. If possible, the chief of police or other impounding official shall notify the owner at the time of seizure. The city clerk shall post a description of said dog, the time and place of seizure, and any indication of identification at city hall and shall keep such notice posted throughout the next ten days. 
(d)  Any dog seized may be reclaimed by the owner within seven days from the date of seizure by paying a fee of $25.00 for the first seizure, $50.00 for the second seizure, and $75.00 for any third or subsequent seizure, plus paying all boarding costs and other costs of caring for the dog, and upon either having the dog vaccinated for rabies or showing proof of current vaccination. 
(e)  If after seven days the dog has not been reclaimed by a person claiming to be the owner, the dog may be offered for adoption by the boarding pound, upon payment of all boarding costs and rabies vaccination fees. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this or any other section, no animal which, in the opinion of a doctor of veterinary medicine, is suffering from rabies, hydrophobia, mange or any other infectious or dangerous disease shall be released until such veterinarian finds that said animal is no longer diseased or a danger to the public or animal health and safety. 
(g)  If after ten days said dog is not claimed or adopted, said dog may be destroyed under supervision of a veterinarian in as humane and painless a manner as possible, the cost to be borne by the city. 
(h)  This section shall in no way conflict with the county's dangerous dog ordinance already in effect. 
(Ord. of 10-7-1996) 
Secs. 6-25—6-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOMESTICATED ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-54. - Rabies vaccination. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal, or anyone having a domesticated animal in his possession or control, to be within the city limits without proof that the animal has a current rabies vaccination. In the case of a dog, the tag indicating proof of such vaccination shall be displayed on a collar. The owner or possessor of any other domesticated animal shall have and be able to produce proof of such vaccination. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 6-55. - Control of domesticated animals. 
The owner or possessor of a domesticated animal within the city limits shall take reasonable care and precautions to prevent such domesticated animal from leaving the real property of the owner or possessor, and ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely tethered or enclosed within a house, fence, building, pen, or other enclosure out of which the domestic animal cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition, and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the domestic animal is left unattended; 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system with a sign posted on the property indicating that the system is in place; or 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person; or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the domestic animal any time it is not restrained while on the property of its owner or possessor. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2011, § 2) 
Sec. 6-56. - Abandoning of domesticated animals. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal to knowingly abandon such animal within the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2011, § 3) 
Sec. 6-57. - Enforcement. 
This article may be enforced by any law enforcement officer of the city, county, or state having jurisdiction with the city. This article shall be enforced with a uniform traffic citation referencing this section and shall be referred to the municipal court or such other court as might be serving as the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2011, § 4) 
Sec. 6-58. - Penalty. 
The penalty for violation of this article shall be a fine in accordance with section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2011, § 5) 
Secs. 6-59—6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CHICKENS 

Sec. 6-81. - Keeping chickens. 
The following provisions apply to the keeping of certain chickens within the city for the personal use of various landowners: The keeping of chickens is permitted in all zoning districts within the city as set out herein. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 6-82. - Number and type of chickens allowed. 
(a)  No more than six chickens are allowed per parcel of land, regardless of the size of the parcel. 
(b)  Roosters and any other crowing chickens are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 6-83. - Commercial operations. 
Chickens, chicken products and/or byproducts shall not be sold on or from any property zoned residential. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 6-84. - Feed. 
Feed must be stored in a fully enclosed, rodent-proof container. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 6-85. - Enclosures. 
(a)  A covered enclosure must be provided for roosting and protection. Chicken coops, chicken houses, and/or roosting structures shall be situated in the rear yard of any property, residential or commercial. Chickens must be kept within a fenced or enclosed area at all times and no landowner or tenant shall fail to prevent his chickens from straying from the property of the owner or keeper, or going upon the property of any other person, or upon any public right-of-way. 
(b)  All chicken houses and enclosures must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and must be positioned at least ten feet from any property line, and at least 25 feet from any residential structure on a neighboring parcel. 
(c)  Any structure used pursuant to this article greater than 25 square feet will be considered an accessory structure and shall comply with the provisions of the ordinances of the city concerning outbuildings. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2018) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i); enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 8-19. - State minimum standard codes. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, as if set out at length herein, the latest editions of the state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B), as adopted and amended by the department of community affairs. 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments. 
(3)  Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 Georgia Amendments. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014 and 2015 Georgia Amendments. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2011 and 2012. 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 Georgia Amendments. 
(b)  If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the state minimum code shall control. 
(c)  A copy of each of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section, as adopted by the state, is filed in the clerk's office and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city. 
Sec. 8-20. - Building, housing and plumbing inspection. 
The building inspector of the county is hereby designated to have the responsibility for inspections within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(20)) 
Sec. 8-21. - Swimming pool safety. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have any pool of water designed for recreational purposes within the city that has a water surface within four feet of the surface of the ground above the surface, or at or below the surface of the ground unless said pool has a fence at least four feet in height, or some other barrier around said pool sufficient to keep children away from said pool. Any gate in said fence shall have a locking device designed to keep small children from opening said gate. This section shall not apply to any pool less than 37 inches in depth; residence will have 30 days to comply. 
(b)  Any pool in existence before the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived which has any type of fence shall not be required to meet the standards set out herein. However, if at any time in the future a new fence is constructed around such pools, the new fencing shall meet these standards. Any existing pool with no fencing shall be required to install fencing within one year of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(c)  The maximum fine for violation of this section shall be $100.00 for the first conviction, $250.00 for the second conviction, and $1,000.00 for any additional conviction plus up to ten days in the county jail. Each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-8-1990; Ord. of 9-14-1998) 
Secs. 8-22—8-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 8-46. - Commercial, business, residential and structural building permit. 
All builders of commercial, business, residential and structural buildings will secure a building permit from the county before starting any construction of a building, regardless of cost. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(3)) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Operating or permitting public dance hall, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to operate, or permit public dancing, whether for profit, charge, or compensation or gratis, any public dance hall, or place of public assembly for public dancing within the corporate limits of the city from and after the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(b)  Any person or corporation violating this section shall be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 2-5-1936) 
Secs. 10-2—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES 

Sec. 10-21. - License required; exception. 
(a)  Every person, firm, or corporation using the streets of the city for the purpose of making sales of any product or merchandise to any firm or any place of business that offer for sale or trade, any product or merchandise, or any person making loans or in any way carrying on a business of description, whether profitable or not, will be required to first obtain a license from the mayor and council before operating such business. 
(b)  The above does not include a farmer who is selling or disposing of agricultural, grove, orchard, poultry, dairy, or beef or other produce grown, raised, or produced by him on a farm owned or rented by him. The foregoing exception does not allow a farmer to buy livestock, agricultural or any of the above-named products and resell, unless he certifies to the city clerk in writing that he has owned and has had possession on his farm at least 60 days prior to such sale. 
(c)  Any person failing to comply with this section shall be guilty of operating without a license and on conviction shall be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(11)) 
Sec. 10-22. - Schedule of business licenses. 
Business license will be as follows: 

 
(Ord. of 10-4-2004) 
Secs. 10-23—10-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of municipal corporations to impose license fee on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 

Sec. 10-48. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $15.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 10-49, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $15.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-49. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and, in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 10-50. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 10-48 in the amount of $15.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 10-51. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-48. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 10-52. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-48. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 10-53. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 10-48 through 10-50 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Ord. of 8-7-1995, § 6) 
Chapter 12 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia cemetery and funeral services act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Lot sizes. 
(a)  Family lots. Family lots are of four graves and with a measurement of 11 feet by 20 feet. 
(b)  Family lots for couples only. Family lots for two graves measure 11 feet by ten feet. 
(c)  Individual lots. Individual lots for one person will measure 11 feet by five feet. 
(Ord. of 8-16-1968, § a) 
Sec. 12-2. - Maintenance and care. 
(a)  Owner will be responsible for his lot beginning at the time of purchase 
(b)  The city is not responsible any further, as to the care, maintenance, improvements, and anything that affects its condition in any way. 
(Ord. of 8-16-1968, § b) 
Sec. 12-3. - Cemetery committee. 
It will be the duty of the mayor and council to appoint someone to be responsible for the sale of lots and caring for the unsold lots. This can be any member of the governing body or any citizen of the city. This appointment shall be made at the first meeting of each year and shall remain in effect for one year, at which time he can be reappointed or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-16-1968, § d) 
Sec. 12-4. - Funds from sale of lots. 
Funds may be used for any purpose of the city, provided that all obligations of indebtedness have been satisfied during the fiscal year of requirement. 
(Ord. of 8-16-1968, § e) 
Sec. 12-5. - Driveways in cemetery. 
It will be the duty of the council to see that all driveways are kept in good condition and usable, expending sufficient funds, if necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-16-1968, § f) 
Sec. 12-6. - Disputes, disagreements, deeds lost. 
(a)  Unless deeds are recorded in the county clerk of court's records, city records will be valid. 
(b)  The cemetery committee will, at the time of purchase of the lot, immediately record, on ledger, or the block, the name of the purchaser and give deed from the city for the lot purchased. This deed will serve as a receipt for funds given to the city clerk along with the name of purchaser. 
(Ord. of 8-16-1968, § g) 
Sec. 12-7. - Grave liners; vaults. 
All burials in the city cemetery after the date of the enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall require that the casket shall be placed in some type of grave liner or grave vault made of concrete, steel or other metal, or some other material designed to prevent the collapse of the grave site. Said grave liner or vault should surround the casket on all sides including the top and bottom and be sealed in such a way as to prevent dirt from entering the area around the casket. Grave lines or vaults made of wood or similar material subject to rot shall not be acceptable. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 12-8. - Cemetery prices. 
Cemetery prices shall be set by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 4-6-2015; Ord. of 9-16-2016) 
Chapter 14 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-8-1 et seq.; bonds, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 14-21. - Judges. 
(a)  In all cases concerning the violation of traffic laws and the violation of the various criminal ordinances of the city, the judge of the probate court of the county may serve as judge of the municipal court as allowed by a contract as entered between the governing authorities of the city and of the county from time to time. If the judge of the probate court shall sit as judge of the municipal court, the compensation of the judge of the probate court, above the normal salary set by various state laws and county ordinances for the probate judge, shall be determined by the terms of the contract set out in this subsection. 
(b)  The city council may appoint a judge of the municipal court other than the judge of the probate court. Any such judge shall be at least 21 years of age, and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. This judge may hear any matter of the violation of various ordinances of the city that are not of a criminal nature, and may also hear any matters properly before municipal court which the probate judge is not able to hear due to a conflict or other reason, and may hear any matter, civil or criminal, properly before the municipal court if either there is no contract in force between the governing authorities of the city and county, or such contract is found to be void or otherwise not in effect. The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council and may be removed by a majority vote of the city council. The judge of the municipal court shall be paid at the rate to be determined by the city council at the time of appointment or at such other rate as the city council shall decide from time to time, provided that the salary of such judge shall not be lowered at any time while he is in office. 
(c)  The city council shall have the authority to appoint an associate judge, who shall meet all qualifications of the judge, to hear any case in which the judge may have a conflict and/or not be able to hear any matter before the court. Compensation for such associate judge shall be the same as for the judge of the municipal court. 
(d)  The judge of the municipal court, and any associate judges of the municipal court must attend any continuing legal and judicial education as required by law or rules of various state agencies. The city may pay the cost of such continuing education, prorate the cost with any other municipality the judge might also serve in a judicial capacity, or require such judge to pay the cost of his continuing judicial education. 
(e)  The judge of the municipal court, or the associate judges, shall have the authority to enforce obedience to the orders of the court, the judgments of the court, and the sentences of the court to the extent allowed by the city Charter and the laws of the state. The judge of the municipal court, with the approval of the mayor and council, may appoint a bailiff to serve complaints, summons, and subpoenas of the court. The mayor and council shall set the compensation of such bailiff. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(1), § I) 
Sec. 14-22. - City attorney. 
The city attorney may represent the city in all matters before the municipal court or before the probate court acting on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(1), § II) 
Sec. 14-23. - Clerk. 
(a)  The city clerk shall also serve as clerk of the municipal court, except that in all matters handled by the county, the staff of the probate judge shall be responsible for keeping all records, both as to adjudication and as to fines and fees collected and disbursed. 
(b)  The clerk of the municipal court shall issue such summons and subpoenas as may be requested by either party to a matter before the court and shall keep records of any such summons and subpoenas issued. The clerk, or any attorney appearing before said court, in their capacity as an officer of the court, may issue oaths of any witnesses. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(1), § III) 
Sec. 14-24. - Pleadings. 
(a)  All matters of a criminal, quasi-criminal, or traffic violation nature shall be brought before either the probate judge or the municipal court on a uniform traffic citation as established by the laws of the state and the rules and regulations of the various agencies of the state. Matters before the court of a civil nature shall be presented in such a way as all parties have reasonable notice of the issues before the court and no matter shall be dismissed simply for failure to follow some particular form or another. 
(b)  Generally, no person shall be required to answer any charge or complaint in the municipal court without at least 30 days' notice of the charges or complaint against him. However, upon petition of the city attorney, or of any citizen or party, that the matter being brought before the court presents an immediate danger to the safety of the citizens of the city, or any person, the court may consider a motion for a temporary hearing to be held with less notice, including immediately upon delivery of a summons, if necessary in the eyes of the judge, provided, however, that when any relief is granted on such an emergency motion, a full hearing shall be held as soon as possible after the expiration of 30 days from the date of service. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(1), § IV) 
Sec. 14-25. - Rules. 
Any rules adopted by the various officers of the court must be approved by a majority of the city council before they shall take effect. Any such rules must be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk/clerk of the municipal court and shall, if requested, be made available to any party before the court at least 48 hours before any hearing or proceeding. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(1), § V) 
Sec. 14-26. - Convening. 
The court shall convene at such times as may be determined by the judge of the municipal court or by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(1), § VI) 
Sec. 14-27. - Court powers. 
The powers of the court shall be as set out in the city Charter, as set by the laws of the state, and as set from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(1), § VII) 
Sec. 14-28. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from a decision and judgment of the municipal court shall be to the superior court of the county, as authorized by the laws of the state and the rules of the superior courts of the northern judicial circuit. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(1), § VIII) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND WATER SEDIMENT CONTROL PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; local erosion programs, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 

Sec. 16-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Broad River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 16-21(1)e. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Broad River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1997(eff.), § II) 
Sec. 16-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Certain land disturbing activity. 
a.  Surface mining, as same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
b.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
c.  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
d.  The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 16-22. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5, of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 16-22 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
e.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chicken, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
f.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
g.  Any project involving 1 1/10 acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves 1 1/10 acres or less, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1)a, b, c, d, e, f, h, or i of this section; 
h.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 16-22; 
i.  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any such land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 16-22(b) and (c). 
(2)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 16-22(b) and (c), issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1997(eff.), § III) 
Sec. 16-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this article; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 25 feet of the banks of any state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided, however, that buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5 of chapter 5 of this title, the "Metropolitan River Protection Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection; and 
(16)  Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the "Georgia Water Quality Act," unless a variance for such activity is granted by the director except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1997(eff.), § IV) 
Sec. 16-23. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party that can obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 16-22(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  A fee in the amount of $15.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 16-22(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)  Denial of permit; when bond required. 
a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.  The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 16-22(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 16-22(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the city certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1997(eff.), § V) 
Sec. 16-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The county building inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary correction action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1997(eff.), § VI) 
Sec. 16-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the issuing authority or its agent, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 16-23(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person violating any provisions of this article, permitting conditions, or stop work order shall be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1997(eff.), § VII) 
Sec. 16-26. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1997(eff.), § VIII) 
Chapter 18 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Standards and requirements for installation, and licensing of manufactured homes and mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRE-OWNED MANUFACTURED HOMES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Installation of pre-owned manufactured homes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-170 et seq. 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously utilized as a residential dwelling and has been titled at any location, regardless of distance, from the site being currently permitted, or which has been owned by a previous owner at the current site or at another site. 
(Ord. of 1-5-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 18-20. - Inspections. 
(a)  All pre-owned manufactured homes that are relocating in or into the city, or which change ownership at their current location with or without being relocated, must pass a safety and health inspection by the county building inspector at their approved fee, or an independent licensed home inspector, or by the county building inspector where the pre-owned manufactured home is located. The inspection will cover, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Exterior conditions. 
a.  The exterior of the home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior walls or living space. 
b.  The exterior must be uniform in appearance. 
c.  The roof shall be structurally sound with no obvious defects which might allow rain or cause moisture to collect on the inside of the home. 
(2)  Interior conditions. 
a.  The floors, walls and ceiling shall be in sound condition and appearance. 
b.  The doors and windows shall be operable and in good working condition. There must be at least one escape window per bedroom. 
c.  Operable smoke detectors must be in place in any common hallway and in each bedroom. 
d.  Bathrooms and kitchens without a window must have an operable ventilation device. 
e.  The home shall contain a kitchen sink and an approved electrical hookup for an electric range type stove or approved natural gas or propane piping for a gas stove. 
f.  Each bathroom in the home shall contain a lavatory and water closet; and at least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facility. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  All plumbing fixtures must be in working condition and free of leaks and obstructions. 
b.  All plumbing fixtures in sinks, tubs, showers, and washing machine hookups must have both hot and cold water supplied. 
c.  The hot water heater must be in safe working condition and free of leaks. 
d.  Heating units must operate in a safe working condition. If the heating system is of type which requires venting, the system or heating unit shall be properly vented. 
e.  Electrical panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. All breakers or fuses shall be correctly labeled as to the portion of the electrical system that breaker or fuse protects. The electrical system must meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code and the electric utility company providing electrical service to the new location, whichever is more stringent. All panels must be accessible. 
f.  All switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc., must be properly installed, wired and shall be in working condition. 
g.  All mobile and manufactured homes, new or pre-owned, erected or located in the city must: 
1.  Meet the requirements of the currently enforced building code, the state fire marshal and the manufacturers specifications prescribed for the setup of such dwelling unit, whichever is more stringent. These include, but are not limited to: footings, piers, tie downs and anchors; 
2.  Meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code (NEC) and the electric utility company providing electrical service, whichever is more stringent; 
3.  Be provided with prefabricated or permanent stairs and landing, constructed of pressure-treated lumber, masonry or metal sufficient to provide safe ingress and egress from two exterior doors of the unit. Individual landings shall be a minimum of 16 square feet (four feet by four feet) and contain side rails if over 30 inches from the ground; 
4.  The area beneath the ground floor of the structure shall be enclosed around the exterior of the structure with a non-load-bearing curtain wall constructed of masonry block, brick, poured concrete, or stone finish, at least four inches thick. The curtain wall shall be penetrated only by openings for installed vents and access doors. The use of vinyl or metal curtain walls is prohibited; 
5.  Have utility meters mounted to the structure rather than on a utility pole, where roof construction will allow, in compliance with the applicable building and electrical codes; 
6.  Have no electrical power supplied to the dwelling unit until all these requirements are satisfied as determined by the county building inspector or his authorized agent; and 
7.  Meet all other state and city statutes, regulations and ordinances. 
(b)  No mobile, manufactured, or pre-owned manufactured home shall be occupied until the standards herein are met. In addition to the standards specified in this section, all pre-owned manufactured homes must comply with all other applicable local and state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 1-5-2015, § 3) 
Sec. 18-21. - Building and occupancy permits. 
(a)  A person desiring to obtain a building and occupancy permit for a mobile, manufactured, or pre-owned manufactured home to be located in the city shall apply for a letter of intent from the city clerk. This letter of intent will be presented by the applicant to the county building inspector or his authorized agent before any such mobile, manufactured, or pre-owned manufactured home is located within the corporate limits of the city. The county building inspector shall issue the building and occupancy permit once he is satisfied that all requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(b)  A building permit is also required if the mobile, manufactured, or pre-owned manufactured home is added to or structurally altered ten square feet or more. 
(c)  A building permit shall not be issued for a mobile, manufactured or pre-owned manufactured home containing aluminum wiring. 
(d)  All mobile and manufactured homes must be registered with the county tax commissioner. 
(e)  All mobile and/or manufactured homes must have approval of the septic system from the county health department before a permit can be issued. 
(f)  An application for a building and occupancy permit for a mobile or manufactured home must be filed by the owner or owner's agent, along with a letter of intent from the city clerk, with the county building inspector. The application must contain: 
(1)  A description of the mobile or manufactured home as to size and dimension; year and model of the unit; the zoning district and classification; tax map and parcel number of the planned location of the mobile or manufactured home; the intended use of the mobile or manufactured home; the name of the owner and the name of the intended occupant; the source of water; and the type of waste disposal system; 
(2)  If the intended use of the mobile or manufactured home is as an accessory use, hardship use or farm caretaker, then details of such proposed use shall be provided by the applicant; 
(3)  If the application is for relocation of a mobile home which was not constructed in accordance with the federal manufactured home construction safety standards required by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), a pre-permitting inspection must be accomplished before a building and occupancy permit is issued; 
(4)  The applicant must provide a copy of a plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county of the tract where the mobile or manufactured home will be located and a sketch plan of where on the tract the structure itself, the components of the septic system, and the drive and parking areas are to be located; 
(5)  A septic tank permit from the county board of health or a verification letter for existing systems; 
(6)  An access letter from the state department of transportation for all new driveways accessing from a state highway; 
(7)  The name of the person setting up the home; 
(8)  The name of the electrician performing the electrical work; and 
(9)  Proof of a current county tax decal. 
(g)  Prior to obtaining a building permit it shall be unlawful to move, locate, relocate, erect or make utility connections of any kind to a mobile, manufactured, or pre-owned manufactured home within the city. 
(h)  Prior to obtaining a building permit it shall be unlawful to occupy or otherwise use as a residence a mobile, manufactured, or pre-owned manufactured home within the city. 
(Ord. of 1-5-2015, § 4) 
Sec. 18-22. - Temporary usage. 
A mobile, manufactured, or pre-owned manufactured home may be used as an office in a subdivision, by a contractor during construction and development, as a temporary residence during the construction of a permanent residence, or as a temporary residence during the reconstruction of a permanent residence which had been destroyed by a fire, natural disaster, or condemnation. All of the uses within this section must be requested in writing, be for a period not exceeding 12 months, and have written approval of the city clerk. The city clerk, with the approval of the mayor and council, may extend the period one time where necessary for up to an additional 12-month period. All setback requirements for the lot on which the temporary usage is allowed must be satisfied. 
(Ord. of 1-5-2015, § 5) 
Chapter 20 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances to enforce, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Open wells. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have any open wells on any property owned or controlled by him, he shall be guilty of creating a nuisance and on conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964) 
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 20-21. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the city council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or any department of the city to enforce any provision of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation not to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2003, § I(A)) 
Sec. 20-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 2; and any building codes adopted by or applicable to structures in the city provided that such building codes for real property improvements shall be those minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 13, article 2, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habituation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also included any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of said property and premises; persons having of record in the city in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; persons having paid an occupation tax to the city for a location or office at the subject building or structure, or person having filed a property tax return with the city as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer who is authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under the referenced sections to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent or designee of such officer. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes of the city, county or state, and the clearing or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2003, § I(B)) 
Sec. 20-23. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officers; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwellings, buildings, structures, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The city council shall appoint or designate the mayor, the sheriff of the county, and city building inspector, and their designees as public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a compliant in rem against the lot, tract, parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties of interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and any parties of interest, state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a time and date certain and at a place designated by the court. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony and present evidence at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(d)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If a repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relationship to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said building, dwelling, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relationship to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, the cost of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure maybe considered. The income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Cost of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such building, dwelling, or structure, to be repaired, altered, or improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The monies needed to make such repairs, alterations, improvements, or demolishment may come from the general revenue of the city or from grants or donations to assist in carrying out the provisions of this article as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-15. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any monies received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing applications of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in this subsection (g) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien in the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except for liens for taxes which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and final statement of cost to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection of real property ad valorem tax, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, chapter 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after the imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to the interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The county tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq., unless such costs are waived by a resolution of the county. 
(3)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(4)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order of the municipal court requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(5)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a compliant in rem as provided in this article. 
(6)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2003, § I(C)) 
Sec. 20-24. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by amendment to this article. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2003, § I(D)) 
Sec. 20-25. - Powers of public officer. 
The public officer designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in a such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2003, § I(E)) 
Sec. 20-26. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of the filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city, or by the county deputy sheriff, and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 48, chapter 4, article 5; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of the state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Non-residents of the state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For non-residents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a non-resident of the state, he shall be served as provided in this section. If such an owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county where such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest of the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of the such person to protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this article, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service is perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceeding. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2003, § I(F)) 
Secs. 20-27—20-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NON-OPERATIONAL VEHICLES 

Sec. 20-56. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to keep, store, maintain or otherwise have within the city, or to allow on one's property, more than one vehicle on any lot which does not have current tag and registration. This article shall not apply to any vehicle stored entirely within the confines of a building with a concrete or other solid (other than soil) floor, walls confining and closing the building from animals, insects, and trespassers on each side, and a roof. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 20-57. - Penalties. 
Any person in violation of this article shall be subject to a fine according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 3-3-2008) 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; hazardous substances, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-16. 

Sec. 22-19. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following: 
(1)  No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear for the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  No person shall, without provocation, use to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
(4)  No person shall, without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and on conviction shall be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(8)) 
Sec. 22-20. - Fire hazards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow any combustible material to accumulate in such a manner as to cause a fire hazard in the city. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and on conviction shall be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. No. 71, 2-5-1973) 
Sec. 22-21. - Shooting. 
Any person who shall shoot any firearms in the city limits unless necessary to protect person or property or by the permission of the mayor and council or who shall shoot any Roman candle, firecrackers, cannon cracker bombs or anything of like nature shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and on conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(7)) 
Sec. 22-22. - Control of offensive odors from livestock and poultry. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep livestock or poultry within the city limits in such a manner as to cause an offensive odor to any resident of the city. Upon written complaint by any citizen, the mayor and council shall investigate said complaint and if complaint is found to be so, the person owning the livestock or poultry shall be notified and given 14 days to eliminate the condition. 
(b)  Persons not complying with this section shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and on conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 8-31-1970(1)) 
Sec. 22-23. - Regulating the crossing of fire hoses. 
It shall be unlawful to cross a fire hose with a vehicle. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and on conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-3. 
(Ord. No. 69, 2-8-1971) 
Secs. 22-24—22-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINORS 

Sec. 22-44. - Curfew. 
(a)  Unless accompanied by an adult, it shall be unlawful for any person 16 years of age, or younger, to idle, loiter or congregate with any other persons on or in the public streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any minor 16 years of age, or younger, to permit, allow or encourage such minor to violate this curfew. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1986, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 22-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in section 22-46, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult means any person who shall be over the age of 17 years. 
Dangerous weapon means any object designed for the purpose of discharging a projectile by means of compressed air, combustion of gun powder, or any other means of propulsion. This shall include pellet guns, BB guns, all types of rifles and shot guns, bow and arrow, cross bow, sling shot, flip or any other type of weapon. 
Direct and immediate supervision means supervision which is so direct that the adult can determine where each projectile to be fired is aimed and can intervene and prevent the firing of a projectile that is not aimed in a safe direction. 
Minor means any person under the age of 17 years. 
(Ord. of 4-2-1990; Ord. of 1-5-1998) 
Sec. 22-46. - Use of dangerous weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess a dangerous weapon while said minor is outside of his home unless said minor is under the direct and immediate supervision of an adult. The minor shall not carry such a weapon upon the public streets of the city or upon land of another unless he is under the direct and immediate supervision of an adult owning said property. Any case against said minors shall be forwarded and turned over to the juvenile court of the county. 
(b)  It shall further be unlawful for any person, minor or adult, to turn over to a minor a dangerous weapon or to allow a minor to obtain such a dangerous weapon and then to allow said minor to go out upon the public streets of the city or upon the lands of others in the city unless said minor is under the direct and immediate supervision of an adult. Any minor charged with the offense shall be forwarded and turned over to the juvenile court of the county. Any adult convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined in an amount of up to $1,000.00 and may be held in confinement up to five days and/or required to perform up to 20 hours of community service. 
(Ord. of 4-2-1990; Ord. of 1-5-1998) 
Secs. 22-47—22-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC STREET PROTECTION 

Sec. 22-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Primary street means any street that is part of the highway system of the state or of the county or a street specifically designated by the mayor and council in this article as now established or amended as a primary street. 
Secondary street means a street the primary maintenance of which is the responsibility of the city and which has not been designated a primary street by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-67. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle with a loaded gross weight of greater than 15,000 pounds or with more than two axles onto or over a secondary street unless that motor vehicle's designation is on the secondary street or passage on that secondary street is necessary to travel to another location within the city that cannot be reached by use of a primary street. Any travel on a secondary street shall be by the shortest possible route to get to the designation. 
(Ord. of 2-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-68. - Penalties. 
Any person found in violation of this article shall be fined in an amount according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 2-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-69. - Signs. 
The city shall purchase, erect and maintain signs which shall be placed in plain view where any secondary street intersects a primary street and where the secondary street intersects a city limit. These signs shall state that through trucks shall be prohibited from using such road. 
(Ord. of 2-5-1990) 
Sec. 22-70. - Designation of streets. 
Georgia Highway 72, also known as Third Avenue, Fourth Street, North First Street, and Eighth Avenue, are hereby designated as primary streets. All other streets are hereby designated as secondary streets. 
(Ord. of 2-5-1990) 
Secs. 22-71—22-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 22-99. - Shooting firecrackers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot firecrackers, Roman candles, bombs or anything of like nature in the city limits between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and any person found guilty shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1938; Ord. of 9-1-1947) 
State Law reference— Regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-100. - Contempt. 
Any person summoned as a witness before the mayor's court or before the city council who shall fail, neglect or refuse to appear and testify or refuse to testify after appearing in said court as a witness shall be arrested and brought before said court or council, there to be dealt with as for contempt and on conviction shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(5)) 
Sec. 22-101. - Gaming. 
It shall be unlawful for persons to gather for the purpose of playing any game with cards, dice or balls or any other game of chance for money or other things of value. Person violating this section shall on conviction be punished as prescribed in section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(6)) 
Sec. 22-102. - Open container. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have in his possession any alcoholic beverages in any open container while sitting, standing, walking, congregating or otherwise being upon the public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way, or in parked cars, on such public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way, or on any public or semi-public parking facility within the city. The term "semi-public parking facility" shall include any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building or multiple-family residential building. As used in this section, the term "open container" means any bottle, can, glass, cup or other vessel which contains an alcoholic beverage not in its original unbroken sealed container. 
(b)  Upon conviction a person may be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 7-2-1990(1)) 
State Law reference— Open container in car, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253. 
Sec. 22-103. - Noise disturbances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or cause to be created loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas, and further including, without limitation, the following specifically prohibited conduct: 
(1)  Musical instruments, radios, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet from the building, structure or vehicle, or, in the case of real property, beyond the property limits in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section; 
(2)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The using, operating or permitting to be used, operated or played of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle; or 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, or private property, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
Any person having been found in violation of this section shall be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 7-2-1990(2)) 
Chapter 24 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; obstructions in street, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal authority to regulate streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 

Sec. 24-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city. 
Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 2) 
Sec. 24-20. - Exceptions from article. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 3) 
Sec. 24-21. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The mayor shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The mayor shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 4) 
Sec. 24-22. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the mayor. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 5) 
Sec. 24-23. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Generally. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the mayor on forms provided by him. 
(b)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the mayor not less than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed that the parade be conducted. 
(c)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization; the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization; and the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with mayor a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(5)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(6)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(7)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(8)  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals and description of the vehicles; 
(9)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(10)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(11)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at such assembly areas; 
(12)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(13)  Any additional information which the mayor shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 6) 
Sec. 24-24. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
The mayor shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic near the parade route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; and 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 7) 
Sec. 24-25. - Notice of denial of permit. 
The mayor shall act upon the application for parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the mayor disapproves the application he shall mail to the applicant within five days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 8) 
Sec. 24-26. - Appeal from denial of permit. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal in writing the denial of a parade permit to the city council and mayor. Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within three days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal with 14 days after its receipt. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 9) 
Sec. 24-27. - Alternative permit. 
The mayor, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be required to tender a permit for a parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the mayor, file a written notice of acceptance with the mayor. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 10) 
Sec. 24-28. - Copies of permit to be sent to city officers. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the mayor shall send a copy thereof to the fire chief. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 11) 
Sec. 24-29. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and 
(7)  Such other information as the mayor shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 12) 
Sec. 24-30. - Duties of permittee; permit to be carried. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 13) 
Sec. 24-31. - Revocation of permit. 
The mayor shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as therein set forth. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 14) 
Sec. 24-32. - Indemnity and bond. 
(a)  The applicant and any other persons, organizations, forms or corporations on whose behalf the application is made, by filing such application, do represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and severally indemnify and hold the city harmless against liability for any and all claims for damage to property, or injury to, or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of the parade or its participants. 
(b)  In addition, no parade permits shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall post with the mayor a $500.00 cash bond upon the issuance of the parade permit. Two hundred fifty dollars shall be refunded after the parade provided there is no disturbance in the parade and that the parade route and the surrounding area is free and clean of litter. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to clean up the parade route and the surrounding area after the parade. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 15) 
Sec. 24-33. - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct, or attempt to stage, present, or conduct a parade without first having obtained a permit therefor as herein provided or who shall otherwise violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade on the city streets for which a permit has not been granted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with all directions and conditions of the parade permit. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 16) 
Sec. 24-34. - Hours and length of parade. 
No parade can commence earlier than 9:00 a.m. and all parades must be ended not later than 6:00 p.m. The total time from the beginning of the parade to the end of the parade shall not be more than one hour. 
(Ord. of 6-9-1986, § 17) 
Chapter 26 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY AND PERSONAL TAX 

Sec. 26-19. - Single billing by county tax commissioner. 
The municipal and county governments have entered an agreement to have the county tax commissioner collect all taxes in a single billing. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1964(13)) 
Chapter 28 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 28-19. - FCC rate regulations. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(c)  The mayor, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Res. of 9-13-1993, § 3) 
Sec. 28-20. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city of any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008, § 1) 
State Law reference— Franchise fee, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-6; cable and video franchise, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-3. 
Sec. 28-21. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes the mayor upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2008, § 2) 
Chapter 30 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 40, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-397, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 72, 7-12-1977) 
Secs. 30-2—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING 

Sec. 30-21. - Regulating parking on Highway 72. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park between Second Street and Sixth Street on the south side of Georgia Highway 72. 
(b)  Anyone breaking or failing to comply with this section shall be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. No. 74, 2-7-1983) 
Sec. 30-22. - Regulating the parking of vehicles with an excess of ten wheels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle that has in excess of ten wheels, or the trailer from such a vehicle, in any area of the city zoned as residential, except when the actual act of loading contents of a home into the truck, or loading contents of the truck into a home, and in no case for a period to exceed 18 hours at one time, nor past 10:00 p.m. local time. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less $25.00 for the first offense within a one-year period, $50.00 for a second offense within a one-year period, and $100.00 for a third or additional offense within a one-year period, and of not more than $1,000.00. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be filed by service of a copy of a uniform traffic citation, with notice of hearing, upon the violator, and such violation may be handled by the municipal court or probate court upon such uniform traffic citation. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2005(2)) 
Secs. 30-23—30-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROADWAYS 

Sec. 30-48. - List of roadways for city. 
(a)  On-system. 

 
(b)  Off-system. 

 
(Res. of 6-8-2007; Ord. of 2016) 
Secs. 30-49—30-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED ZONES 

Sec. 30-70. - Established. 
The following speed zones are established: 

 
(Ord. No. 72, 7-12-1977) 
Chapter 32 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate and provide sewage collection and disposal systems, stormwater systems, and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6), (7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Tap fees. 
Tap fees will be established by mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2016) 
Secs. 32-2—32-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 32-21. - Water meters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to connect a second household onto an existing water meter, be it permanent or a mobile home, without first getting approval in writing from the mayor and council. 
(b)  Failure to comply with this section shall cause water to the meter to be cut off. 
(Ord. of 8-31-1970(3)) 
Sec. 32-22. - Water rates and deposits. 
The rates for water and the amount of deposits to be charged shall be as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 5-7-1977; Ord. of 7-31-1978) 
Sec. 32-23. - Groundwater protection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, individually or through any agent, except for the city government, for its corporate purposes, to drill, dig, bore or otherwise cause to be excavated any well, cistern, or hole more than 20 feet in depth. 
(b)  If it should become necessary for any individual to construct some excavation for purposes other than the drawing of groundwater, and such excavation should be more than 20 feet below the natural surface at the location of the excavation, the person intending to make such an excavation may apply for a permit for such excavation. The application shall include certification from an engineer with a license issued by the state showing that said engineer is, in the judgment of the mayor and council, qualified to make such determinations, and a surety bond or proof of errors and omissions insurance, in an amount of no less than $250,000.00, stating that such an excavation would not in any way interfere with the free movement of groundwaters used as a water source by the city or any other operators of currently existing wells in the city, would not in any way contaminate or increase the likelihood of contamination of such groundwaters, and would not in way expose any underground pool, stream, or table of water directly to the surface or cause such pool, stream, or table to work its way to the surface. After careful review of such application and study, and with the protection of the groundwater sources of the city as their primary objective, the mayor and council shall decide if a permit for such excavation should be granted. 
(c)  Any person who violates or causes to be violated this section shall be subject to a fine according to section 1-3. The mayor and council may also enforcement this section through the equitable remedies available in the superior court of the county or such other superior court or courts as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
Chapter 34 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Purpose and enactment. 
The mayor and council of the city, under the authority of the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 of the State of Georgia, as amended, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the municipality and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other requirements, hereby ordain and enact into law the official zoning regulations for the incorporated area of the city, for planning, zoning and subdivision control purposes and agreed upon through laws enacted by both the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, art. I) 
Sec. 34-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Regulations for the City of Colbert, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, art. II) 
Sec. 34-3. - Definitions of terms used in this chapter. 
(a)  General. Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The single word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The word "map" means the "Official Zoning Districts Map for the City of Colbert, Georgia." 
(b)  Specific definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use means a use customarily incidental to the principal use of land. 
Airport means a transportation terminal facility where aircraft take off and land. 
Alley means a platted service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
Automobile service station means any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting, major repair, or automatic washing. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation and/or by pre-arrangement, meals, or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Building, accessory, means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or land. 
Building, alterations of, means any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, beams, columns, and girders) except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any movement of the building or use from one location to another. 
Building, height of, means the vertical distance measured form the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front to the height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs and to the deck line of a mansard roof. 
Building, main, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
Clinic means an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment. 
Club means buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service to the general public. 
Commission means the mayor and city council. 
Council means the mayor and city council. 
District means a section of the city within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Day-care center means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation or institution, or any other group wherein are received for pay seven or more children under 18 years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for more than four hours but less than 24 hours per day. 
Day-care home means any place operated by any person who receives for pay three to six children under 17 years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for more than four hours but less than 24 hours per day. 
Dwelling means any building or portion there of which is designed for or used for residential purposes. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
Dwelling, tenant, means a residential structure located on a farm and occupied by a non-transient farm worker and employed by the owner of the farm. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed for and occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, or a corporation or a certain person or persons. 
Fall-out shelters means a structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger to human life from nuclear fall-out, air raids, storms or other emergencies. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, or hotel, as herein defined. 
Feedlot means any parcel of land upon which the mechanical or hand feeding of five or more livestock animals per acre is performed for a period exceeding 30 days. 
Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, but not including the attic space providing headroom for less than seven feet; unusable basement or cellar space not used for retailing; uncovered steps or fire escape; open porches; accessory water or cooling towers; accessory off-street parking spaces; and accessory off-street loading berths. 
Frontage lot means the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Frontage, street, means all the property on the side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
Garage apartment means a dwelling unit for one family erected above a private garage detached from the main dwelling. 
Garage, parking, means a building or portion thereof designed or used for storage of motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils may be sold, and in connection with may be performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repairs. 
Garage, private, means an accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. A carport would be considered as a private garage. 
Garage, repair, means a building or portion thereof, other than a private or parking garage, designed or used for the storage, servicing, repairing, equipping and hiring of motor driven vehicles. 
Home occupation means an occupation for gain or support conducted by members of a family residing on the premises. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided for more than 20 persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally made through the interior of the building. 
Institution means a non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment. 
Junkyard means a lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting dismantling, storage, and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof, except an accumulation of one or more automobiles, without current registration. 
Kennels means any location where raising, grooming, caring for or boarding of dogs, cats, or other small animals for commercial purposes is carried on within the city. 
Kindergarten means a school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from four through six years; which operate for less than four hours per day. 
Landing area means the area of an airport used for landing, taking off, or taxiing of aircraft. 
Laundromat means a business that provides home-type washing, drying and/or ironing machines. 
Laundry and dry cleaning pickup means a business that provides only for the convenience of taking and picking-up of laundry, such establishments not having any equipment for processing of the laundry. 
Loading space means a space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and other carriers. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one or more main buildings and its accessory buildings with such open and parking spaces as are required by the provisions of this chapter and having its frontage upon a public street. 
Lot of record means a lot or parcel of land whose existence, location and dimensions have been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot having a frontage on two streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Mobile home means a detached single-family dwelling unit designed for long-term occupancy and constructed originally with wheels for movement (whether or not such wheels have later been removed) and which has plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
Mobile home park means any lot on which are customarily parked two or more mobile homes for a longer period of time than 30 days. 
Motel means a building or a group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for rental primarily to automobile transients and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally to the outside of the building. 
Nonconforming use means a use of land existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or at the time of a zoning amendment and which does not conform with the regulations of the use district in which it is located. 
Open space means a yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking, loading space, drying yard or refuse storage space. 
Playschool means a school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from three to four years and which operates for less than four hours per day. 
Plat means a map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section, lot or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Principal use means the primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Professional means, when used in connection with "use" and "occupancy," a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stock brokers and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term "professional," however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the structure nor any use which would create any loud noise or noxious odors within the city. 
Restaurant drive-in means an eating and/or drinking establishment which caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served consumes his food and/or drink while sitting in a motor driven vehicle, as opposed to a restaurant serving exclusively inside an enclosed building. 
Right-of-way means access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose. 
Right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Roominghouse means a building other than a hotel where lodging for three but not more than 20 persons is provided with no meals served. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments, planned, and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property. 
Sign means any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or marks, or combinations thereof, by which anything is made known, such as the designation of an individual, a firm, an association, a profession, a business, a commodity, or product which are visible from any public way and used as an outdoor display. 
Sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof encompassing the entire advertising area, excluding architectural trim and structural supports. 
Sign, outdoor advertising, means a structural poster panel or painted sign, either freestanding or attached to a building, for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject unrelated to the premises upon which it is located. 
Sign structure means a structure composed of a single pole or multiple poles which is located on the ground or on top of another structure and which supports no more than two signs. 
Sign structure facing means the surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited, not including architectural trim and structural supports. 
Story means that portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, half, means a street which does not meet the minimum right-of-way widths as set forth in this chapter. 
Street line means the legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Subdivider means any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as herein defined with the confines of the city. 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development, and includes any division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process as subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 
(1)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved; and 
(2)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between separate or common owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the lots created are in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Townhouse means a single-family dwelling unit which is erected in a row as part of a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved fire-resistant party wall extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. 
Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses and is not more than eight feet in body width and is of any weight provided its body length does not exceed 29 feet. 
Travel trailer park means any lot on which are temporarily parked two or more travel trailers for a period of less than 30 days. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a main building, such space being open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line and the front line of building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the right-of-way line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
Yard, rear, means an open space on the same lot with the main building, such space being unoccupied except possibly by an accessory building and extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building projected to the side lines of the lot. On all corner lots the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. If no front yard is required, the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot. On corner lots, the side yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its greatest dimension. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, §§ 31, 32; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-4. - Conflict with other laws. 
When the regulations of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than as required in or under any statute or other legal document, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. When the provisions of any statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 14.1) 
Sec. 34-5. - Separability. 
If any portion or provision of this chapter is found to be unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect any other portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 14.2) 
Sec. 34-6. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are herewith repealed. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 14.3) 
Secs. 34-7—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 34-31. - Division of the city into districts. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into six districts as follows: 
(1)  R-1 — Single-Family Residential District. 
(2)  A-1 — Agricultural District. 
(3)  R-2 — Group Development District. 
(4)  C-1 — Neighborhood Commercial District. 
(5)  C-2 — General Commercial District. 
(6)  M-1 — Wholesale and Light Industrial District. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 41) 
Sec. 34-32. - Incorporation of the zoning map. 
The sectional atlas property maps bounded in one volume entitled "1971 Official Zoning Districts Maps for Colbert, Georgia," hereinafter called official zoning maps, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be the official zoning maps and are hereby made a part of this chapter. Said maps shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the city clerk, where the maps will be accessible to the general public. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 42) 
Sec. 34-33. - Map amendment. 
If, in accordance with provisions of this chapter, changes are made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed in the official zoning maps, changes shall be made on the official zoning maps promptly after the amendment has been approved by the council, together with a numerical entry on the official zoning maps referring to the application on file which states the date of the official action and the brief description of the nature of the changes. No amendment to this chapter which involves matter portrayed on the official zoning maps shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on said maps. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 43) 
Sec. 34-34. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, land lot lines, centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads, shorelines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries, and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, or railroads, or right-of-way of the same, or the centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning maps. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning maps. 
(3)  Where a district boundary line as appearing on the official zoning maps divides a lot which is single ownership at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the use classification of a larger portion may be extended to the remainder by the council without recourse to amendment procedure. 
(4)  Where a public road, street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street or alley. 
(5)  In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 44) 
Secs. 34-35—34-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-62. - Use. 
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulation herein specific for the district in which it is or is to be located. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 51) 
Sec. 34-63. - Building heights. 
No building shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered so as to exceed the height limit, to accommodate or house a greater number of families than are required or specified in the regulations herein for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 52) 
Sec. 34-64. - Lots. 
No lot even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, inner or outer courts, lot area per family or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use within the city. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 53) 
Sec. 34-65. - Yards. 
No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues, and eaves, provided such projections shall not extend more than two feet beyond the yard area requirements. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 54) 
Secs. 34-66—34-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING USES, OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 34-88. - Purpose. 
This article is established to regulate nonconforming uses, off street parking, off street loading and unloading; and to provide suitable off-street parking. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, art. VI, intro. ¶) 
Sec. 34-89. - Nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter except that the nonconforming structure or use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use. 
(2)  Extended except in conformity with this chapter; or excepting repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures. 
(3)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 75 percent of its replacement at the time of destruction except that existing residential dwellings which are nonconforming because of area and minimum yard requirements may be replaced regardless of extent of damage. 
(4)  Deeded, sold or transferred unless such use shall be placed in conformance with this chapter. 
(5)  Subject to these provisions if the use or structure is a dwelling which is nonconforming because of area or yard requirements. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 61.1) 
Sec. 34-90. - Off-street automobile parking. 
Within the city, off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted use is established in accordance with this chapter. 
(1)  General requirements. For the purpose of this chapter the following general requirements are specified: 
a.  The term "off-street parking space" shall mean a space at least nine feet wide and 20 feet in length with a minimum net area of 180 square feet, excluding area for egress and ingress and maneuverability of vehicles. 
b.  If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the building inspector and city attorney may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within 600 feet of such principal use. 
c.  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
(2)  Parking space requirements for all districts. Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal in or to at least the minimum requirements for the specific land use set forth. 
a.  Automobile sales and repair garages: one space for each regular employee plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area used for repair work. 
b.  Gasoline filling stations: three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility plus one space for each gas pump attendant. 
c.  Hospitals and nursing homes or similar institutions: one space for each three beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor and one space for each three employees. 
d.  Hotels: one space for each two guest bedrooms plus one space for each four employees. 
e.  Industrial use: one space for each two employees on a single shift plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
f.  Lodges and clubs: one space for each five members. 
g.  Office building: one space for each 300 square feet of floor space. 
h.  Places of amusement or assembly without fixed seats: one space for each 200 square feet of floor space devoted to patron use. 
i.  Places of public assembly: one space for each four seats in the principal assembly room. 
j.  Residential: one space for each dwelling unit. 
k.  Restaurants: one space for each 75 square feet of floor area devoted to patron use, plus one space for each four employees. 
l.  Retail business: one space for each 250 square feet of sales space. 
m.  Roominghouses and boardinghouses: one space for each two bedrooms. 
n.  Schools: one space for each two faculty and staff employees; for each three other employees; and for each five high school students. 
o.  Tourist courts and motels: one space for each accommodation. 
p.  Wholesale business: one space for each two employees. 
(3)  Site requirements. All off-street parking shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements (except in residential areas): 
a.  All parking areas for commercial and industrial uses shall be hard surfaces with concrete or plant bituminous material and shall be maintained in a dustproof condition and that a good stand of grass be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
b.  Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that light is reflected away from adjacent properties. 
c.  The parking lot shall be adequately drained. 
d.  Along those lot lines of parking area which abut residential districts, a dense planting of trees and shrubs shall be established on a strip of land not less than eight feet in width adjacent to the districts and provided that such planting be not less than six feet in height and a substantial bumper rail of wood, metal or concrete shall be installed on the inside of the planting strip. 
e.  No sign, whether permanent or temporary, shall be placed within the public right-of-way. Signs and planting strips shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 62; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-91. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
(a)  On every lot on which a business, trade or industry is hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated below for loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Minimum loading and unloading space required: 
(1)  Retail business: one space of 300 square feet for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Wholesale and industry: one space of 500 square feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals: sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded at the terminal at any one time. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 63) 
Sec. 34-92. - Control of drive cuts and vision clearance. 
The requirements for controlling drive cuts and maintaining vision clearance shall be as follows: 
(1)  Drive cuts. No drive cut shall exceed 50 feet in length, nor shall drive cuts be closer than 20 feet to drive curb cuts or closer than 20 feet to an intersection of two streets. 
(2)  Vision clearance. In all use districts no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee or other obstruction to vision between the heights of 2½ and ten feet from the ground level shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or railroad lines, or of a street intersection with a railroad line. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 64) 
Sec. 34-93. - Classification of streets. 
All streets in the city are hereby divided into seven classes if presently existing as shown on the official street map adopted by the council and on record in the office of the city clerk. 
(1)  Freeways are those streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic; and which are divided with full control of access and with no crossings at grade. 
(2)  Expressways are those streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic; and which are divided with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at intersections. 
(3)  Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. 
(4)  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of freeways, expressways, and arterial streets and highways. 
(5)  Minor or local residential streets, including culs-de-sac, are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(6)  Minor or local commercial and industrial streets are those which are primarily for access to the abutting commercial and industrial properties. 
(7)  Alleys are those which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(8)  Marginal access streets or frontage roads are minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to freeways, expressways, or arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 65) 
Sec. 34-94. - Storage and parking of trailers and vehicles. 
Storage and parking of trailers and vehicles shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No more than two commercial vehicles per dwelling shall be permitted. 
(2)  A travel trailer shall not be occupied for more than 14 days while parked or stored in any area except in a travel trailer park or providing the travel trailer meets requirements set forth under section 34-179(a) for mobile homes on individual lots. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 66; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-95. - Screening and lighting. 
(a)  In any commercial or industrial district, any operation not conducted within a building, such as drive-in businesses, outdoor recreation, outdoor storage of materials, and outdoor servicing activities, shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height where necessary to conceal such areas or facilities from a residential district adjoining or facing across a street in the rear or on the side of the principal building or use. 
(b)  In any district where reference is made requiring adequate screening of a specified operation, such screening shall be a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height. 
(c)  Outdoor lighting of all types shall be directed so as to reflect away from all residential dwellings, and shall be so situated as not to reflect directly into any public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 67) 
Sec. 34-96. - Minimum distance between buildings. 
The following minimum distances between buildings shall be required unless otherwise specified within this chapter: 
(1)  The minimum distance between main buildings located on the same lot or parcel shall be: 

 
(2)  There shall be a distance of not less than five feet between a main and accessory building located on the same lot or parcel for commercial and industrial uses. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 68; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-97. - Newly annexed land. 
All land newly annexed into the corporate limits of the city, shall be automatically classified as R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District, pending further study by the council to determine its proper use district. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 69) 
Secs. 34-98—34-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USE PROVISIONS BY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 34-122. - Purpose. 
This article is established to ensure that each district is reserved primarily for its intended use, including public and semi-public uses which are necessary to serve the needs of the district. It is the intent of this article to promote the stability and character of land development and to promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the city's comprehensive planning program. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, art. VII, intro. ¶) 
Sec. 34-123. - Residential districts. 
(a)  R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts. Within R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incident thereto and provided the requirements in section 34-181 are met. 
(3)  Fall-out shelters provided the requirements under section 34-182 are met. 
(4)  Home swimming pool provided the location is not closer than ten feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least four feet in height and provided approval from the county health department has been obtained. This applies only to pools that are 36 inches or deeper. 
(5)  Agricultural, forestry, and livestock production for non-commercial purposes excluding poultry production, turkey ranges and feedlots; provided that the operation is conducted on a tract of land not less than ten acres in area, and that no structure containing livestock and no storage of manure or odor or dust producing substance or use shall be located within 200 feet of a property line. 
(6)  Churches and related accessory uses. 
(7)  Home occupations (provided the requirements under section 34-183 are met). 
(8)  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care center and homes. 
(9)  Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics, convalescent or nursing homes. 
(10)  Individual mobile homes provided the requirements under section 34-179(a) are met. 
(11)  Private and public schools and libraries, excluding business and trade schools. 
(12)  Public utility structures and buildings provided that the installation is properly screened as required by section 34-95. No office shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site. 
(13)  Golf, swimming, tennis or country clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purposes is located within 100 feet of any property line. 
(14)  Cemeteries provided the requirements under section 34-186 are met. 
(b)  A-1 Agricultural District. Within the A-1 Agricultural District the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses as permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
(2)  Agricultural, forestry, and livestock production for commercial purposes excluding poultry production, turkey ranges and feedlots; provided that the operation is conducted on a tract of land not less than ten acres in area, and that no structure containing livestock and no storage of manure or odor or dust producing substance or use shall be located within 200 feet of a property line. 
(3)  Radio and communication towers may be located only in A-1 zoning districts in the city. Maximum height shall be 180 feet. Base of tower must be a minimum of 200 feet from any property line or street right-of-way. 
(c)  R-2 Group Development District. Within the R-2 Group Development District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses as permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential and A-1 Agricultural Districts. 
(2)  Townhouses, provided the requirements under section 34-180 are met. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(4)  Hotels, and apartment hotels. 
(5)  Office buildings, exclusively used for professional occupancy and of such character and nature that such use will not adversely affect adjacent and nearby residential properties. 
(6)  Clubs, lodges and boardinghouses. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 71; Ord. of 4-16-2001; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-124. - Commercial districts. 
(a)  C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
(1)  Required conditions. All businesses, servicing, storage or processing shall be those whose operations or processes are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, vibration or congestion. Uses are limited to those which will serve as convenience centers to serve the needs of their immediate neighborhoods and maintain economic compatibility. All businesses, servicing, storage or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible as for example: of street loading; miniature golf courses and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District, the following uses are permitted: 
a.  All uses as permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential and R-2 Group Development Districts. 
b.  Any retail business or commercial use in which there is no processing or treatment of materials, goods or products, including: 
1.  Appliance store including radio and television service. 
2.  Art and antique shop. 
3.  Bakery employing not more than ten persons. 
4.  Bank and drive-in bank. 
5.  Bicycle or motorcycle store. 
6.  Book, stationery, camera or photographic store. 
7.  Confectionery store. 
8.  Clothing, shoe, millinery, dry goods and notions. 
9.  Drug store. 
10.  Ice cream parlor. 
11.  Furniture, home furnishings, including office furniture and equipment. 
12.  Florist, nursery and gift shop. 
13.  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, meat market, delicatessen, catering and supermarkets. 
14.  Hardware and paint store. 
15.  Jewelry store. 
16.  Automobile service stations provided the requirements under section 34-184 are met. 
c.  Any of the following service businesses: 
1.  Barbershop and beauty shop. 
2.  Cafe, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants, but not including night clubs, bars and taverns or drive-in restaurants. 
3.  Dress making and tailoring shops. 
4.  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, and self-service laundry. 
5.  Shoe repair shops. 
d.  Office buildings. 
e.  Bowling alleys, and billiard rooms. 
f.  Outdoor advertising signs as provided in section 34-185. 
(b)  C-2 General Commercial District. 
(1)  Required conditions. All business, servicing, storage or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible as for example, off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, miniature golf courses and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. Uses, processes or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason or odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, or vibration. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within the C-2 General Commercial district, the following uses are permitted: 
a.  All uses as permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
b.  Bus and railroad terminal facilities. 
c.  Temporary tents for revivals. 
d.  Theater, but not including drive-in theaters. 
e.  Commercial parking garage or lot provided no entrance or exit be on the same side of the street and within the same block as a school and that curb breaks be limited to two for each 100 feet of street frontage, each not to exceed 30 feet in width and not located closer than 20 feet to a street intersection. 
f.  Temporary uses including sale of Christmas trees, carnivals, church bazaars, sale of seasonal fruit and vegetables from roadside stands, but such use not permitted for a period to exceed two months in any calendar year. 
g.  Bottling works for soft drinks. 
h.  Printing, blueprinting, book binding, photostating, lithography and publishing establishments. 
i.  Undertaking or mortuary establishments, and ambulance services. 
j.  All uses of a predominantly retail nature, including: 
1.  Electrical supplies. 
2.  Heating and plumbing equipment. 
3.  Dairy products. 
4.  Tires, batteries, and other automotive accessories. 
5.  Sporting goods. 
6.  Farm and garden supplies. 
k.  Drive-in restaurants. 
l.  Motels. 
m.  Food locker plant renting lockers for the storage of food, including sale of retail, delivery, and cutting package of meats but not including slaughtering. 
n.  Automobile, travel trailer, farm equipment and implements, and mobile home sales (new and used) which need not be enclosed, but any mechanical or body repair must be conducted entirely within a structure which shall not have any opening, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district and provided further that all vehicles on a used car sale lot must be in operating condition at all times. 
o.  Automobile repair garage, mechanical and body, provided all operations are conducted in a building which shall not have any opening, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district and which shall not store or otherwise maintain any parts or waste material outside such buildings. 
p.  Milk bottling and distribution and ice cream manufacture. 
q.  Places of assembly including auditoriums, stadiums and dance halls. 
r.  Produce and farmers markets. 
s.  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 72; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-125. - Wholesale and industrial district. 
Within the M-1 Wholesale and Light Industrial District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Ice plants. 
(2)  Automobile laundry or car wash provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain a number of vehicles (at 200 square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines and in addition that curb breaks be limited to two, each not to exceed 30 feet in width, and located not closer than 20 feet to an intersection. 
(3)  Contractor's storage and equipment yards when located entirely within a building or fenced area as required in section 34-95. 
(4)  Building and lumber supply establishments provided entire storage area is properly screened as required in section 34-95, or of a greater height as required to adequately screen such areas, and that any machine operations be conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any opening, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district. 
(5)  Establishments for manufacture, repair, assembly or processing including: 
a.  Confectionery manufacture. 
b.  Clothing and garment manufacture. 
c.  Laboratories for testing materials, chemicals, analysis and photography processing. 
d.  Manufacture and assembly of scientific, optical and electronic equipment. 
e.  Manufacture of musical instruments and parts. 
f.  Manufacture of souvenirs and novelties. 
g.  Manufacture of toys, sporting and athletic goods. 
(6)  Wholesale warehouses. 
(7)  Drive-in theaters provided acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movement, and provided that the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, arterial, or collector street located within 200 feet of such screen. 
(8)  Truck terminals provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet are provided for trucks entering or leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
(9)  Trade shops including sheet metal, roofing, upholstery, electrical, plumbing, venetian blind, cabinet making and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning and sign painting provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any opening, other than stationary windows, within 100 feet of any residential district. 
(10)  Food processing plants, such as bakeries, meat packers, fish and poultry houses. 
(11)  Frozen dessert and milk processing plants. 
(12)  Any other establishments for the manufacture, repair, assembly, or processing of materials, similar in nature to those listed in subsection (5) of this section which are not objectionable by reason of smoke, dust, odors, bright lights, noise or vibration, or which will not contribute to the congestion of traffic. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 74; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Secs. 34-126—34-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AREA, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-149. - Minimum lot size. 

 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 81.1; Ord. of 8-6-1990; Ord. of 12-1-2003; Ord. of 11-6-2006; Res. of 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 34-150. - Minimum yard requirements and maximum building height. 

 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 81.2; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Secs. 34-151—34-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 34-179. - Mobile homes and travel trailers. 
(a)  Single unit mobile homes. In all districts other than the M-1 Wholesale and Light Industrial Districts single unit mobile homes are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be 1½ acres and conform to the minimum yard requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The mobile home unit shall be oriented with its long axis parallel to the street on which the lot fronts. 
(3)  The mobile home unit shall be underpinned with a permanent masonry foundation, all porches and decks shall be underpinned with masonry or lattice, no mobile home or stick built home shall be moved into the city that is over eight years old, setup time for mobile homes shall not exceed 60 days, or permit will expire. 
(b)  Temporary usage. A single mobile unit, or travel trailer, may be used for an office in a subdivision by the developer, temporary residence during construction of permanent residency, or for other special purposes, for a period not to exceed six months upon written approval from the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 91; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-180. - Townhouses. 
Within the districts permitting townhouses, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  No more than ten or fewer than three continuous townhouses shall be built in a row with approximately the same front line. Each dwelling unit shall have 66,150 square feet of lot area. 
(2)  No side yard is required except that on corner and interior lots the end of the building in any townhouse grouping shall conform to the side yard requirements of that district. 
(3)  Not more than 50 percent of the lot area shall be occupied by building and parking space. 
(4)  Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks; and no off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route, from a door of the dwelling unit it intends to serve. 
(5)  All other requirements within the district in which the townhouses are located shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 92; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-181. - Accessory and temporary buildings. 
(a)  Accessory buildings. The location of accessory buildings and uses in residential districts must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof, and therefore such requirements applicable to the main building. 
(2)  Accessory buildings in commercial zones shall not to be closer than five feet to the main building, nor closer than five feet to the lot line. 
(3)  A detached accessory building, not more than two stories in height, may be constructed on not more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
(b)  Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district and shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 93; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-182. - Fall-out shelters. 
Fall-out shelters are permissible as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If any portion of the structure extends above the ground, that portion above the ground must comply with the yard, and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the building inspector. 
(2)  If the structure is completely underground, it need not comply with yard requirements or percentage of lot coverage requirements. 
(3)  Fall-out shelters may be contained within other structures or may be constructed separately. 
(4)  Fall-out shelters may be used for any permissible use in the district where situated. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 94) 
Sec. 34-183. - Home occupation. 
(a)  Special requirements. Home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
(1)  The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the home occupation is to be located, or must have written approval of the owner of the property if the applicant is a tenant. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be operated by the members of the family residing on the premises and only articles or services shall be sold or offered for sale as may be produced on said premises. 
(3)  The home occupation shall not employ persons other than those of the immediate family residing on the premises for a period exceeding 30 consecutive days. 
(4)  The home occupation shall not generate excessive traffic or produce obnoxious odor, glare, noise, vibrations, electrical disturbance, or radioactivity or other conditions detrimental to the character of the surrounding area. 
(5)  The building in which the home occupation is to be located must be an existing structure ready for occupancy and not a proposed structure. 
(6)  Any business sign placed on the premises shall not be larger than four square feet in sign area. 
(7)  The home occupation if conducted in the main building shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the floor area of said building. If the home occupation is conducted in an accessory building the floor area of the accessory building shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the floor area of the principal building. 
(8)  Home occupations shall be limited to those which do not substantially change the residential character or exterior appearance of the building and land, create excessive traffic generation or congestion or disturb the residential setting of the area. 
(b)  Expiration. A permit for home occupations shall expire under the following conditions: 
(1)  Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation was issued, and no subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation until he shall have been issued a new permit after proper application. 
(2)  Whenever the holder of such a permit fails to exercise the same for any period of six consecutive months. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 95) 
Sec. 34-184. - Automobile service stations. 
Within the districts permitting automobile service stations, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Location. The property on which an automobile service station is located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district, or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, or institution for children or dependents. 
(2)  Site requirements. An automobile service station shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of 120 feet and a minimum area of 12,000 square feet. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from all street right-of-way lines and all canopies shall be set back 15 feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
(3)  Access to site. Vehicular entrances or exits at an automobile service station shall: 
a.  Not be provided with more than two curb cuts for the first 120 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 
b.  Contain an access width along the curbline of the street of not more than 40 feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and shall not be located closer than 20 feet to the adjoining property. 
c.  Not have any two driveways, or curb cuts, any closer than 20 feet at both the right-of-way line and the curb or edge of the pavement along a single street. 
(4)  Gasoline pump islands. All gasoline pump islands shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line; and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line; however, the pumps shall be at least 50 feet from the centerline of an arterial street, 55 feet from the centerline of the collector street and 45 feet from the centerline of other streets. 
(5)  Off-street parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces are required with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 
(6)  Other site improvements. In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
a.  A raised curb of at least six inches in height shall be erected along the street property line, except for driveway openings. 
b.  A solid fence or wall six feet in height shall be erected along all adjacent property lines facing any adjacent residential lot. 
c.  Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties. 
d.  Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within the public right-of-way and shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
e.  All drivers, parking, storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the lot. 
(7)  Storage of inflammable products. Outside above-ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil or other inflammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any automobile service station in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 96) 
Sec. 34-185. - Signs. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions of this section shall govern the location, size, setback and height of signs in each of the use districts established in this chapter in order to ensure safe construction, light, air, and open space, to reduce hazards at intersections, to prevent the accumulation of trash, and to protect property values of the entire community. In addition, the provisions set forth in any building code adopted by the council including all revisions and amendments thereto shall also be adhered to. 
(1)  All types of signs, except outdoor advertising signs, not exceeding four feet in area shall be allowed in all zoning districts without a permit. 
(2)  All outdoor advertising signs shall be subject to the same side yard and height limitations imposed upon other buildings or structures in the use district in which said sign is located except as otherwise provided herein. 
(3)  For the purpose of computing sign area only one side of a "V type" or double-faced outdoor advertising sign shall be considered. 
(4)  Rooftop outdoor advertising signs or sign structures shall not extend more than 30 feet above the roofline. Rooftop outdoor advertising signs or sign structures shall not extend beyond or overhang any exterior wall of the building upon which secured. 
(5)  No outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be placed upon any street or highway right-of-way. 
(6)  No outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be located in such a manner as to materially impede the view of any street or highway with a railroad grade crossing, as required in section 34-92(2). 
(7)  No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
(8)  No portion of any outdoor advertising sign shall be less than ten feet above the level of a sidewalk or other pedestrians thoroughfare, nor shall be less than 16 feet above the level of public driveway, alley or street. 
(b)  Outdoor advertising signs as permitted uses. Outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted in the following classification districts provided the specified requirements are adhered to: 
(1)  R-1, R-2 residential districts. No outdoor advertising signs are permitted. 
(2)  C-1, C-2 commercial districts. Only one sign per business. Maximum single sign no more than 32 square feet or 64 square feet for double side sign, or 64 square feet for a single sign mounted on the side of a business. 
(3)  M-1 wholesale and industrial district. Only one sign per business. Maximum single sign no more than 32 square feet or 64 square feet for double side sign, or 64 square feet for a single sign mounted on the side of a business. 
(c)  Signs prohibited in all districts. The following signs are prohibited in all districts: 
(1)  Any sign erected or painted upon a sloping roof, fence, tree, standpipe, fire escape or utility pole. 
(2)  Any sign which uses the work "Stop" or "Danger" prominently displayed and/or which is a copy of imitation of official traffic control signs. 
(3)  Any sign which contains flashing or intermittent red, green, or amber illumination. 
(d)  Maintenance and removal of outdoor advertising signs. 
(1)  All outdoor advertising signs and sign structures shall be kept in repair and in a proper state of preservation. All unsafe signs must adhere to the provisions of the building code adopted by the council including all revisions and amendments thereto. 
(2)  Outdoor advertising signs which are no longer functional, or are abandoned, shall be removed, or relocated, at the owner's expense, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days following dysfunction. 
(3)  Any legally established nonconforming outdoor advertising sign or sign structure shall be permitted without alteration in size or location, provided that the requirements of section 34-89 are adhered to and provided that nothing herein shall prevent maintenance, repairing, or posting of legally established nonconforming signs. 
(4)  In the event of the destruction, partial or complete, of an outdoor advertising sign, the owner thereof shall have the right to reconstruct, rebuild, renovate, or repair said sign substantially to the same condition as before said destruction, provided the provisions in section 34-89 are adhered to. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 97; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-186. - Cemeteries. 
Within the districts permitting cemeteries, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. 
(2)  Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than five acres. 
(3)  All structures shall be set back no less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(4)  All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right-of-way line. 
(5)  The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 98) 
Sec. 34-187. - Automobile junkyards. 
Only one vehicle without current registration, is allowed in all districts. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 99; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Secs. 34-188—34-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 34-208. - Existing lots and variances. 
Where the owner of a plot of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots of record at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived did not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter; or if the topography, physical shape, or other unique features of such lots of record prevent reasonable compliance with the setback used as a building site upon approval of the building inspector. The yard and other space requirements of the district in which the property is located may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit reasonable use of the property as a building site. Such reduction of these space requirements shall constitute a variance. However, in no case shall the building inspector permit any lot in a residential district to be used as a building site which is less than one-half of the district's minimum area and yard requirements as set forth in article VI of this chapter. Further, the building inspector shall grant variances only upon finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)  The application of this chapter would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this chapter; 
(4)  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; and 
(5)  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which is not permitted by right or by conditional use permit in the district involved. Use variances are specifically prohibited by the 1957 General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 101) 
Sec. 34-209. - Front yard setback of dwellings. 
The front yard setback requirement of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setbacks of the adjoining buildings, and in no case shall the setback be less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way upon which said lot fronts. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 102) 
Sec. 34-210. - Height limits. 
The height limits of this chapter shall not apply to structures not intended for human occupancy such as church spires, flagpoles, chimneys, monuments, radio or television towers or aerials, water towers or similar structures. The height limits shall apply to signs. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 103) 
Sec. 34-211. - Corner lots. 
The side yard setback requirements for corner lots shall be the same as the front yard requirements for adjoining lots on the same street. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 104) 
Sec. 34-212. - Vision clearance. 
In all use districts except the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the finished grade of streets shall be erected, permitted or maintained within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way lines of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 105) 
Sec. 34-213. - Access to public streets. 
Access to public streets shall be maintained in accordance to the following requirements: 
(1)  Each principal use shall be located on a lot or parcel which provided frontage on a public street having a right-of-way of not less than 30 feet. 
(2)  Any additional dwelling shall have access to a public street by means of a passageway open to the sky at least 15 feet in width. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 106) 
Sec. 34-214. - Planned unit development and subdivisions. 
Planned unit developments shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No cul-de-sac shall be over 1,250 feet long. 
(2)  All water mains must be six inches or larger. 
(3)  Fire hydrants must be installed every 1,000 feet. 
(4)  All streets must be 60 feet, R/W. 
(5)  All subdivisions must have plans for council approval. 
(6)  All water systems shall be installed to AWWA standards. 
(7)  All subdivision improvements shall be paid for by the developer. 
(8)  Concrete curb and gutters are required. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 107; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Secs. 34-215—34-236. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 34-237. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector or mayor, and he is hereby given the authority, to interpret, administer, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city council is hereby given the authority and responsibility to appoint a building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 11.1; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-238. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any structure to be located, erected, moved, added to or structurally altered in excess of $500.00 building or alteration cost without obtaining a building permit issued by the building inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The city shall issue a certificate of compliance. After issuance by the city the applicant must carry the certificate of compliance to the county building inspector, at which time the county will issue the building permit. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 11.2; Ord. of 12-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-239. - Application for building permit. 
All applications to the building inspector for building permits shall be accompanied by plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale showing: 
(1)  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon with a plat that meets a standard of recording by the clerk of the superior court; 
(2)  The streets which abut the property; 
(3)  The size of the building on the lot; 
(4)  The location of the building on the lot; 
(5)  The location of existing structures on the lot, if any; 
(6)  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 
(7)  The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots; 
(8)  The layout of off-street parking and loading spaces, and whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 11.3) 
Sec. 34-240. - Construction progress. 
Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by the permit shall have been commenced within six months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 11.4) 
Sec. 34-241. - Certificate of occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(1)  Any lot or change in the use thereof; 
(2)  A building hereafter erected or altered or a change in the use of an existing building; or 
(3)  Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or an amendment thereto that is changed, extended, altered, or rebuilt thereafter. The certificate of occupancy shall state specifically where the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of the chapter. 
Upon payment of any required fees, the building inspector shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of the land or building, as stated on the certificate and signed by the owner or his authorized agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building finally constructed complies with the plans submitted for the building permit. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 11.5) 
Sec. 34-242. - Denial of certificate of occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the provisions of this chapter, or unless the building complies with the sketch or plan upon which the building permit was issued. The building inspector shall state in writing the reason for denying such certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 11.6) 
Sec. 34-243. - Penalties. 
Any persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to section 1-3. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 11.7) 
Sec. 34-244. - Remedies. 
In the event any building is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building inspector, or any appropriate city authority or any persons who would be damaged by such violation may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each building or land use. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 11.8) 
Secs. 34-245—34-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - APPEAL PROCEDURE 

Sec. 34-266. - Purpose. 
This article is established to identify the procedure whereby any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, art. XII, intro. ¶) 
Sec. 34-267. - Appeal to the city attorney. 
Any party aggrieved because of the alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector in enforcement of this chapter, may appeal in writing to the city clerk for and receive a hearing by the city attorney for an interpretation, the city attorney may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 12.1) 
Sec. 34-268. - Appeal from the city attorney. 
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the city attorney may seek review of such decision by a court of record, as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 12.2) 
Secs. 34-269—34-288. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 34-289. - Right to amend. 
This chapter, including the zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the city government. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, art. XIII, intro. ¶; Ord. of 8-30-1983, intro. ¶) 
Sec. 34-290. - Public hearing required. 
Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 13.1; Ord. of 8-30-1983, § 13.1) 
Sec. 34-291. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any person desiring to submit a petition requesting a change in zoning shall file such petition, with a plat of the property attached thereto, together with a payment of $50.00 to cover administrative and advertising costs, with the city clerk. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a petition requesting a change in zoning, the applicant shall at his expense cause to be erected in a conspicuous place on the property in question a sign of not less than nine square feet with not less than three-inch black letters upon a white background which shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC 
A petition has been filed requesting that this property be changed from (insert present district name) to (insert district requested). A public hearing will be held at (insert place) on (date) at (time). 
All those having an interest in this petition shall be present. 

 
(c)  At least 15 days before such public hearing, the city clerk shall advertise a date, time, place and purpose of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation of the city. 
(d)  The public hearing shall be held by the mayor and council. At the public hearing the mayor and council will make a decision to approve or not approve the request for rezoning. 
(Ord. of 2-1-1971, § 13.2; Ord. of 8-30-1983, § 13.2) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia Statutes. 

 