CODE OF THE CITY OF VIENNA, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 1999 by Order of the Mayor and City Council ____________ OFFICIALS of the CITY OF VIENNA, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION ____________ Willie J. Davis Mayor ____________ Jimmy Kelly Dr. Napoleon Williams Michael R. Joiner Elizabeth English City Council ____________ Stanley Gambrell City Manager ____________ Verlin Jones City Attorney ____________ Gail B. Bembry Assistant City Clerk CURRENT OFFICIALS of the CITY OF VIENNA, GEORGIA ____________ Emerson Lundy, Sr. Mayor ____________ Walter Brown Eddie Daniels Elizabeth English Brenda Gramm City Council ____________ Verlin Jones City Attorney ____________ Debra Spring Deputy City Clerk ____________ Gail B. Bembry City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Vienna, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Ronald McLaughlin, Supervising Editor, and John W. Welch, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Stanley Gambrell, City Manager, and Verlin Jones, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Vienna, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Vienna, Georgia. ©  Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Vienna, Georgia. 1999. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE     The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits."     In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. Ord. No. DateAdopted Include/Omit Supp. No. Ord. of 12-20-10 Include 3 Ord. of  3-28-11 Include 3 Ord. of  9-28-98 Include 4 Ord. of 11-13-06 Include 4 Ord. of 10- 8-12(1) Include 4 Ord. of 10- 8-12(2) Include 4 Ord. of  7-22-13 Include 5 Ord. of  9-23-13(1) Include 5 Ord. of  9-23-13(2) Include 5 Ord. of  9-23-13(3) Include 5 Ord. of  6- 9-14(1) Include 6 Ord. of  6- 9-14(2) Include 6 Ord. of  7-25-14(1) Include 6 Ord. of  7-25-14(2) Include 6 Ord. of  7-28-14(1) Include 6 Ord. of  7-28-14(2) Include 6 Ord. of  8-25-14 Include 6 Res. of  4-27-15 Include 7 Ord. of 12-12-11(1) Include 8 Ord. of 12-12-11(2) Include 8 Ord. of  4-14-14(1) Include 8 Ord. of  4-14-14(2) Include 8 Ord. of  2- 8-16(1) Include 8 Ord. of  2- 8-16(2) Include 8 Ord. of  4-25-16(1) Include 8 Ord. of  4-25-16(2) Include 8 Ord. of  4-25-16(3) Include 8 Ord. of 12-14-15(1) Include 9 Ord. of  3-27-17(1) Include 9 Ord. of  3-27-17(2) Include 9 Ord. of  4-24-17(1) Include 9  
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Printed herein is 1977 Ga. Laws, p. 2880, which provides for the Charter of the City of Vienna, Georgia. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, POWERS 
Sec. 1.10 - Incorporation.     This act shall constitute the whole Charter of the City of Vienna, repealing and replacing the charter provided by an Act of the General Assembly, approved August 16, 1915 (Ga. L. 1915, p. 899), as amended. The City of Vienna, Georgia, in the County of Dooly and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the mayor and City Council of Vienna, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all the courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure. 
Sec. 1.11 - Corporate boundaries. (a)  The boundaries of the City of Vienna shall be those existing on the effective date of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the City of Vienna, at all times, shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated: "City of Vienna, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map. Such entries or additions shall be made by and under the direction of the mayor. Photographic or other copies of such map certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map. (b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12 - Examples of powers.     The corporate powers of this city may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: (1)  Property taxes. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; (2)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by state law; (3)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; (4)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the government of the city, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; (5)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; (6)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; (7)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; (8)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, as amended, or under other applicable general laws of the State of Georgia as are or may be enacted or amended; (9)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; (10)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public service, to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Georgia Public Service Commission; (11)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; (12)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, as amended, or other applicable general laws of the State of Georgia, as are or may be enacted or amended; (13)  Sidewalk maintenance. To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; (14)  Building regulation. To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building and building trades; to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; (15)  Planning and zoning. To provide such comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; subdivision regulation and the like as the mayor and city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing community; (16)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots and public disturbances; (17)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawnshops; the manufacture, sale or transportation of alcoholic beverages; the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; to license, tax, regulate or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores and massage parlors; (18)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; (19)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (20)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; (21)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge and restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; (22)  Public hazards, removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; (23)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; (24)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; (25)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; (26)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; (27)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; (28)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; (29)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of the same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift or humane disposal, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of the ordinance enacted hereunder; (30)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; (31)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; (32)  Pensions. To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; (33)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; (34)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations providing for services to be made therefor; (35)  City agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; (36)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; (37)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen and to organize and operate a firefighting agency; (38)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; (39)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; (40)  Public transportation. To organize such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; (41)  General health, safety and welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; (42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13 - Exercise of powers.     All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 
Sec. 2.10 - Creation; composition; number; election.     The governing authority of this city shall be composed of a mayor and four councilmen who shall be elected in the manner provided by article V of this charter. 
Sec. 2.11 - Terms and qualification of office.     The members of the governing body shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilman unless he shall have been a resident of the city for a period of two (2) years immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the council and shall continue to reside therein during his period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city. 
Sec. 2.12 - Vacancy; filling of; forfeiture of office. (a)  The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. (b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in article V of this charter. (c)  The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he: (1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; (2)  Willfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this charter; or (3)  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
Sec. 2.13 - Prohibitions.     Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected. 
Sec. 2.14 - Compensation and expenses.     The salaries of the Mayor and City Council of Vienna shall be fixed by said mayor and city council at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council immediately following the regular election held in December of each year except as otherwise limited by the general laws of the State of Georgia. The mayor and councilmen shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Sec. 2.15 - Code of ethics.     The council may enact by ordinance a code of ethics which shall apply to all elected officials, appointed officers and employees of the city. 
Sec. 2.16 - Inquiries and investigations.     The council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.17 - General power and authority of the council. (a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by article I of this charter. (b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the creation of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and/or property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity or well-being of the inhabitants of this city. The council may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for the violation thereof. (c)  The council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish or consolidate offices, agencies and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies and departments expressly provided for by this charter. 
Sec. 2.18 - Chief executive officer.     The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. He shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter. 
Sec. 2.19 - Powers and duties of mayor.     As the chief executive of this city, the mayor: (a)  Shall see that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; (b)  Shall preside at all meetings of the mayor and council and vote in the event of a tie vote among the council; (c)  Shall appoint and remove all officers, department heads and employees of the city by and with the consent of council except as otherwise provided for in this charter; (d)  Shall exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; (e)  May prepare and submit to the council a recommended annual operating budget and recommend capital budget; (f)  May submit to the council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and, from time to time, such other information as the council may request; (g)  Shall recommend to the council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; (h)  Shall call special meetings of the council as provided for in section 2.23(b); (i)  Shall approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in section 2.20; (j)  May examine and audit all accounts of the city; (k)  Shall require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever he deems it expedient; (l)  Shall perform other duties as may be required by general state law, this charter or ordinance. 
Sec. 2.20 - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. (a)  Every ordinance adopted by the council shall be presented promptly by the clerk to the mayor. (b)  The mayor, within 10 calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the clerk with or without his approval, or with his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12 noon on the 10th calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council through the clerk a written statement of his reasons for his veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. (c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk to the council at its next meeting and should the council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of three (3) members, it shall become law. (d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the council over the mayor's veto as provided herein. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to council as though disapproved and shall become law unless overridden by council as in subsection (c) above. 
Sec. 2.21 - Mayor pro tem; selection; duties.     The council shall elect by majority vote from among its members a mayor pro tem who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's disability or absence. The council shall elect an acting mayor pro tem from among its members for any period in which the mayor pro tem is disabled, absent or acting as mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all members of the council. 
Sec. 2.22 - Organization meeting. (a)  The council shall meet for organization on the first scheduled meeting in January next following the city election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows:     "I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of (mayor or councilman as the case may be) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." (b)  Following the induction of members, the council by majority vote of all the members thereof shall elect one (1) of their number to be mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall serve for a term of one (1) year and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
Sec. 2.23 - Regular and special meetings. (a)  The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. (b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or two (2) members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone, or shall be left at their residences in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such meeting and attendance at the meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent, any business which may be transacted at a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. (c)  All meetings of the council shall be public to the extent required by general state law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible 48 hours prior to such meetings. 
Sec. 2.24 - Rules of procedure.     The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2.25 - Quorum, voting.     Three (3) councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote, and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the council shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Sec. 2.26 - Action requiring an ordinance. (a)  Except as herein provided, every official action of the council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be: "The Council of the City of Vienna hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. (b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. 
Sec. 2.27 - Codes of technical regulations. (a)  The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to section 2.28 of this charter. (b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations may be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.28 - Signing, authenticating, recording, codification, printing. (a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by council. Every ordinance shall be signed by the mayor after adoption. (b)  The council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto, with this charter and any amendment thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Vienna, Georgia." Copies of the code may be furnished to all officers, departments and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the council. (c)  The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption. Following publication of the first code of this city and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 
Sec. 3.10 - Administrative and service departments. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the council shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. (b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or general state law, department heads and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications as shall be prescribed by the governing authority. (c)  All appointive officers and department heads shall receive such compensation as prescribed by council. (d)  There may be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director may, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. (e)  All directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the council. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under his supervision. The director involved may appeal to the council who, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by a vote of three (3) council members. 
Sec. 3.11 - Boards, commissions and authorities. (a)  The council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. (b)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or general state law. (c)  The council may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. (d)  Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or general state law. (e)  No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be administered by the mayor. (f)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three (3) members of the council. (g)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general state law, each board, commission or authority of the city shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman and one (1) member as vice-chairman and may elect as its secretary one (1) of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12 - City attorney.     The council may appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13 - City clerk.     The council may appoint a city clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council and to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the council may direct. 
Sec. 3.14 - Tax collector.     The council may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of the State of Georgia relating to the collection, sale or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.15 - City accountant.     The council may appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.16 - Consolidation of functions.     The council may consolidate any two (2) or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector and city accountant or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one (1) or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. 
Sec. 3.17 - Position classification and pay plans.     The mayor may be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the council for approval upon request by the council. Said plans may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted the council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.18 - Personnel policies.     The council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: (a)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; and (b)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; and (c)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and (d)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and (e)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
Sec. 4.10 - Creation of municipal court.     There is hereby established a court to be known as the municipal court of the city which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city and to punish for a violation of the same. 
Sec. 4.11 - Chief judge, associate judge. (a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time or standby associate judges as shall be provided by ordinance. (b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and be a resident of the same judicial circuit as the municipal court is located in. All judges shall be appointed by council. (c)  Compensation of the judge or judges of the municipal court shall be as determined by majority vote of council. (d)  The municipal court judge or judges may be removed for cause by a unanimous vote of the council. (e)  Before entering on duties of his office, each judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor or partiality which shall be entered upon council minutes. 
Sec. 4.12 - Convening.     The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as designated by council or at such times as deemed necessary by the judge to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.13 - Jurisdiction; powers. (a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the city and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $75. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $500 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. As an alternative to fine or imprisonment, the municipal court may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding 60 days. (b)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the costs of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the costs of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. (c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall on order of the judge be forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. (d)  The municipal court shall have authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. (e)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. (f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by state law. (g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the city granted by general state laws generally to mayor's, municipal and police courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 4.14 - Appeal.     The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the Superior Court of Dooly County from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court; provided, however, that any person who fails to file his appeal within 30 days of the date of his conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
Sec. 4.15 - Rules for court.     With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations relative to the procedure of the operation of the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection upon request. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 
Sec. 5.10 - Applicability of general law.     All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 (Ga. L. 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11 - Election of council and mayor. (a)  On the first Wednesday of December, 1977, and on said date biennually thereafter, there shall be an election for the mayor and two (2) councilmen. For the period beginning when the mayor and two (2) councilmen elected as provided herein take office and ending when the first two (2) councilmen elected under subsection (b) hereof take office, the governing authority of the City of Vienna shall be composed of the mayor and two (2) councilmen elected as provided herein and the two (2) councilmen (aldermen) elected under the former charter of the City of Vienna whose regular terms of office will expire at the time the first two (2) councilmen elected under subsection (b) hereof take office. (b)  On the first Wednesday in December, 1978, and on said date biennually thereafter, the remaining two (2) councilmen shall be elected to serve two (2) year terms. Thereafter, the mayor and councilmen shall be elected on the same date in the order of expiration of terms of those so elected such that a continuing body is created. (c)  The terms of office of the mayor and councilmen elected as provided in this section shall begin upon their taking the oath of office as provided for in section 2.22 of this charter. 
Sec. 5.12 - Special elections; vacancies.     In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the expiration of the term of that office, the council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term or may leave such office vacant pending the next regular election. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 (Ga. L. 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.13 - Nonpartisan elections.     Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 5.14 - Other provisions.     Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 (Ga. L. 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15 - Grounds for removal.     The mayor, council members, or others provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one (1) or more of the following causes: (a)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; (b)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; (c)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; (d)  Knowingly violate any express prohibition of this charter; (e)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or (f)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by law. 
Sec. 5.16 - Procedure for removal.     Removal of an above-described officer may be accomplished by one (1) of the following methods: (a)  By majority vote of the full council after an investigative hearing, the officer to be removed not voting if he is a member of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than 10 days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Dooly County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. (b)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Dooly County as provided by law. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
Sec. 6.10 - Property tax.     The council may assess, levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government; providing governmental services; for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations; and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. The city is hereby exempted from the provisions of Georgia Code sections 92-4101 through 92-4104 inclusive. 
Sec. 6.11 - Millage rate, due dates, payment methods.     The council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax; a due date; and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one (1) lump sum, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount approximated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Sec. 6.12 - Occupation and business taxes.     The council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to the city to be so taxed. The council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in this article. 
Sec. 6.13 - License, permits, fees.     The council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and if unpaid shall be collected as provided in this article for delinquent taxes and fees. The council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6.14 - Service charges.     The council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for sewer, sanitary or health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing such services. It [if] unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in this article for delinquent taxes and fees. 
Sec. 6.15 - Special assessments.     The council shall have power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of 10 percent, and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes. Said lien shall also be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided for in this article for city property taxes. 
Sec. 6.16 - Construction, other taxes.     The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.17 - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.     The council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue due the city by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; allowing exceptions for hardship; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.18 - Transfer of executions.     The city clerk shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi. fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer or other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of tax fi. fas. Such transfer or assignment, when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title and interest as provided by Georgia law governing sales and transfers of tax fi. fas.; provided, however, that upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fi. fa., whether assigned, transferred or executed by the city, the owner of such property in fee simple or lesser interest shall not lose his right to redeem the property in accordance with the requirements of redemption of property sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fas. as said requirements now exist or as may be hereinafter provided by law. 
Sec. 6.19 - General obligation bonds.     The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20 - Revenue bonds.     Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as provided by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 31, 1937, known as the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as now or hereafter amended, or by any other Georgia law as now or hereafter provided. 
Sec. 6.21 - Short-term notes.     The city must obtain and repay any short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year or as is otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
Sec. 6.22 - Fiscal year.     The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.23 - Preparation of budgets.     The council may provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.24 - Additional appropriations.     The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or at any special meeting called for such purpose. Any such additional appropriations, however, may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies. 
Sec. 6.25 - Capital improvements budget. (a)  The mayor may submit to the council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall have power to accept with or without amendments or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of the inhabitants, provided that such authorization is passed by majority vote of the council. (b)  No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, that the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget, accompanied by his recommendations thereon, at any time during the fiscal year. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a vote of the council. 
Sec. 6.26 - Independent audit.     There shall be an annual, independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted governmental accounting principles. Any audit of any funds of the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Sec. 6.27 - Contracting procedures.     No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: (a)  It is in writing; (b)  It is made or authorized by the council and such approval is entered in the council minutes. 
Sec. 6.28 - Centralized purchasing.     The council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.29 - Sale of city property. (a)  The council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by code section 69-318 of the 1933 Code of Georgia (Ga. L. 1976, p. 350), as now or hereafter amended. (b)  The council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. (c)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 7.10 - Eminent domain.     The council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken under chapter [section] 36-202 of the Georgia Code, subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other Georgia law applicable now or provided in the future. 
Sec. 7.11 - Franchises.     The council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book to be kept by him. The council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 7.12 - Official bonds.     The officers and employees of the city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the council may from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
Sec. 7.13 - Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations.     All ordinances, bylaws, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter, are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the council. 
Sec. 7.14 - Existing personnel and officers.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 60 days before or during which the existing council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.15 - Pending matters.     Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel or office[s] as may be provided by the council. 
Sec. 7.16 - Penalties.     The violation of any provisions of this charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 7.17 - Construction. (a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. (b)  The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is not. (c)  The word "city" shall mean the City of Vienna, Georgia, and its governing authority. (d)  The word "council" shall mean the city council of this city. (e)  The singular shall include the plural and the masculine the feminine and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.18 - Severability.     If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.19 - Specific act repealed.     An act incorporating the City of Vienna in the County of Dooly, approved August 16, 1915 (Ga. L. 1915, p. 899), is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.20 - Effective dates.     For the purpose of holding the elections provided for in section 5.11 of this act, this act shall become effective upon its approval by the governor or upon its otherwise becoming law without his approval. For all other purposes, this act shall become effective when the mayor and councilmen elected under subsection (a) of section 5.11 of this act take their oaths of office. 
Sec. 7.21 - Repealer.     All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. Ga. Laws Year Chapter Section  Section this Charter 1915 899 1.10 7.19 1937 761 6.20 1968 885 5.10 5.12 5.14 1976 350 6.29 1977 2880 1.10—7.21  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.     The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of the City of Vienna, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Vienna City Code." (Code 1980, § 1-1-1) Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 2.26(b). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.     In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise:     Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.     City. The words "the city" shall mean the City of Vienna in the County of Dooly and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided.     City council. The words "city council" or "the council" shall mean the city council of Vienna.     Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of the City of Vienna, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.     Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.     County. The term "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Dooly, State of Georgia.     Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours.     Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.     Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.     Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and council.     Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.     Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.     Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Vienna, Georgia" were added thereto.     Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.     Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number.     Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."     O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.     Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.     Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.     Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city.     Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.     Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property.     Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.     Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places.     Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.     Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned.     Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.     Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence.     Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council.     Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the city seal.     Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive.     Sheriff. The word "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Dooly County, Georgia.     Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways.     Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write.     State. The term "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia.     Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city.     Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.     Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.     Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days.     Written or in writing. The words "in writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.     Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. (Code 1980, § 1-1-2) State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.     The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. (Code 1980, § 1-1-3) State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code.     It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Code 1980, § 1-1-4) State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. (a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. (b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. (2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. (3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. (4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. (5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. (6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. (7)  Any appropriation ordinance. (8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. (9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. (10)  Any zoning ordinance. (11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. (12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. (13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. (14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. (15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. (a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. (b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. (c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Vienna, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. (d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. (Code 1980, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code.     It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. (Code 1980, § 1-1-7) State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty, continuing violations. (a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: (1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; (2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or (3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. (c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. (Code 1980, § 1-1-5) Charter reference— Punishment for violation of ordinances, § 4.13(c). State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-1; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-12. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. (a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. (b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Cemeteries, ch. 18; emergency management agency, § 22-81 et seq.; elections, ch. 26; planning, ch. 58. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 2-1. - Departmental organization.     The affairs of the city shall be assigned to the various administrative departments of the city as established by the mayor and council from time to time. (Code 1980, § 2-4-3) 
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Regular and special meetings, § 2.23. Cross reference— Emergency authority of mayor, § 22-56 et seq. 
Sec. 2-31. - Compensation.     The compensation of the mayor and each councilmember shall be provided by ordinance from time to time. (Code 1980, § 2-1-1) 
Sec. 2-32. - Regular meetings.     Regular meetings of the mayor and council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m. (Code 1980, § 2-1-11) 
Sec. 2-33. - Adjourned meetings.     Any meeting of the mayor and council may be continued or adjourned from day to day or for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. (Code 1980, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-34. - Order of business. (a)  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: (1)  Approval of minutes of last meeting; (2)  Reports of committees and commissions; (3)  Unfinished business; (4)  Reading by the clerk of any communications; and (5)  New business. (b)  If the mayor or council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. (c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor and council until it has been seconded; and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any councilmember, be reduced to writing. (Code 1980, § 2-1-13) 
Sec. 2-35. - Rules of procedure.     Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedure of the mayor and council shall be governed by the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. (Code 1980, § 2-1-14) 
Sec. 2-36. - Previous questions.     The previous question may be called at any time by a majority of the councilmembers present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any councilmember. (Code 1980, § 2-1-15) 
Sec. 2-37. - Motions having precedence. (a)  When a question is under consideration no motion shall be received except as follows: (1)  To lay on the table; (2)  To postpone to a time certain; (3)  To postpone indefinitely; (4)  To refer to a committee; (5)  To amend; (6)  To strike out or insert; or (7)  To divide. (b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. (Code 1980, § 2-1-16) 
Sec. 2-38. - Motion to adjourn.     A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. (Code 1980, § 2-1-17) 
Secs. 2-39—2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
Sec. 2-71. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or resolution establishing a personnel system for officers and employees of the city or any ordinance or resolution amending the same. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 2-72. - City clerk; duties.     In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: (1)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; (2)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; (3)  Receive all money due the city, including taxes, licenses and fees, and pay out the same only upon orders of the mayor and council; and (4)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 2-4-1) Charter reference— City clerk, § 3.13. 
Sec. 2-73. - City attorney; duties.     The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: (1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council; (2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts; and (3)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 2-4-2) Charter reference— City attorney, § 3.12. 
Secs. 2-74—2-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 70. 
Sec. 2-106. - Depository.     The mayor and council shall designate one or more local-financial institutions to serve as depositories for the city in one or more accounts, as required. The clerk and treasurer shall deposit in such depositories to the credit of the city moneys, checks and funds. Endorsements for deposit may be by written or stamped endorsement with or without designation of the person making the endorsement. Withdrawals may be made from such depositories by check, draft or warrant, specifying the fund or account on which it is drawn, manually signed by the mayor, or by the mayor pro tem in the absence or disability of the mayor to act, and countersigned by the clerk and treasurer. The mayor and the clerk and treasurer are jointly authorized to enter the safe deposit boxes or receptacles leased from time to time by the town from the depositories. The clerk and treasurer is instructed to certify to the depositories a copy of this section and to certify the signatures as will appear on checks or other writings, and, when any such person shall cease to hold the office, to promptly certify to the depository the signature of the successor. (Code 1980, § 2-4-4) 
Secs. 2-107—2-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS 
Sec. 2-125. - Intent.     It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the City of Vienna that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-126. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the term:     Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct.     Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor and/or any council member of the city and any member appointed to any board, authority, or commission of the city.     Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have interest in transactions involving: (1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; (2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefit, unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; (3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or (4)  Any person or business of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-127. - Prohibitions. (a)  No member of the governing authority shall: (1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy him/her favor in the performance of official acts. (2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties. (3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain. (4)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public. (5)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law, now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority. (6)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. (7)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and d.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation. (8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved. (9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or for persons having an interest. (b)  Prohibition (a)(2) of this section shall not apply in the case of: (1)  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value. (2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service. (3)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction. (4)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. (c)  Prohibition (a)(5) of this section shall not apply to: A member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-128 are made to the council or council chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is being filed. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-128. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest.     An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-129. - Disqualification.     A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-130. - Prohibited contracts.     The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply to the case of: (1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds. (2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan. (3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. (4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency. (5)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city administrator following disclosure. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-131. - Restriction on contracts with former members of the governing authority.     The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within a preceding 12-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-132. - Complaints.     Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro tem. The mayor or the mayor pro tem, shall appoint three members of the council who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed. If the facts do warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided hereinafter. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-133. - Board of ethics. (a)  Composition of the board of ethics: (1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. (2)  The mayor and council members shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of ten individuals who have consented to serve as members of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. (3)  The city administrator shall maintain a list of these ten qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairperson. (4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. (b)  The board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: (1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs. (2)  To hold a hearing within 60 day after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall not result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall not prevent refilling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months. (3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section. (4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standard required by this article. (5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article. (6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints. (7)  To report its findings to governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-134. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints.     The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within five business days after completion of the hearing. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-135. - Penalty and member rights. (a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. (b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by council, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 2-136. - Appeals. (a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. (b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Dooly County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. (Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 46; alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 70-141 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.     Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine.     Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to all fortified wines.     Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to brandy.     Gallon or wine gallon means a United States gallon of liquid measure equivalent to the volume of 231 cubic inches or the nearest equivalent metric measurement.     Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of the alcoholic beverage.     Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.     Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: (1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits; (2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and (3)  In the case of wine, any vintner.     Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container.     Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public.     Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale.     Shipper means any person who ships an alcoholic beverage from outside this state.     Standard case means six containers of 1.75 liters, 12 containers of 750 milliliters, 12 containers of one liter, 24 containers of 500 milliliters, 24 containers of 375 milliliters, 48 containers of 200 milliliters, or 120 containers of 50 milliliters.     Tax stamp means the official mark, stamp or indication used to indicate the payment of taxes imposed by this chapter.     Taxpayer means any person made liable by law to file a return or to pay tax.     Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers.     Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. (Code 1980, §§ 7-2-4(1), 7-2-24(a), 7-2-41, 7-2-81) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Possession of alcoholic beverages in public places.     It shall be unlawful to possess open cans or bottles containing alcoholic beverages on any public street, alley, right-of-way or other public facility or place within the city. (Code 1980, § 9-1-8) 
Sec. 6-3. - Drinking and/or possession in public.     It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic beverages or have opened containers containing alcoholic beverages in their possession on any public property, streets or sidewalks, or upon any open premises adjacent to any public business in the city, whether or not such person is located in a vehicle within boundaries of the city. (Ord. of 4-8-74; Ord. of 3-27-17(1)) 
Sec. 6-4. - Sale on election days.     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the sale of alcoholic beverages on local election days is hereby authorized and permitted so long as such sales are in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. (Res. of 8-13-84) Cross reference— Elections, ch. 30. 
Secs. 6-5—6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES 
Sec. 6-36. - Retail licensee qualifications.     A retail malt beverage licensee must be a person of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. (1)  The licensee shall not have been convicted within five years of the date of his application of a felony, or any violation of the laws of this state or any other state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. (2)  The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. (3)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to the above and shall place same on file with the city clerk before any license is issued. (4)  If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. (5)  No person shall be granted a license to engage in the sale of malt beverages at retail unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the mayor and council that such person shall be of good moral character. (6)  Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. (Code 1980, § 7-2-1) 
Sec. 6-37. - Wholesale licenses.     Wholesale malt beverage licenses shall be issued only to those parties who are licensed by the state to sell and distribute malt beverages at wholesale. Application shall be made with the city clerk. (Code 1980, § 7-2-2) 
Sec. 6-38. - Regulations. (a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of malt beverages at retail in the city nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: (1)  Knowingly sell beer to a minor. (2)  Knowingly sell beer to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. (3)  Sell beer upon the licensed premises or permit beer to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. (b)  In addition: (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any malt beverages where such person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale such beverages. (2)  Malt beverages shall be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by no other means than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the mayor and council to make deliveries in the city. (3)  Transportation of malt beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of the wholesale permit. (4)  Dealers in malt beverages shall not engage in the sale of such beverages on Sunday or any other days prohibited by state law. (5)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 7-2-3) 
Sec. 6-39. - Joint responsibility; sales to minors; possession by minors. (a)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase alcoholic beverages for a minor. (b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit faked, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages to which he is not legally entitled. (c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to have alcoholic beverages in his possession. (d)  No person engaged in the business regulated under this article shall make or permit to be made any sales to minors. (Code 1980, § 7-2-4) 
Sec. 6-40. - Licenses. (a)  Each wholesaler designated with the state revenue department to serve this city shall, upon written application, be issued a license on an annual basis for operation as a wholesale dealer. (b)  The applicant for a retail license shall pay to the city at the time his license is received a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk as an annual license fee for operation for one year beginning on February 1, or half of this amount if the license is issued during the last six months of the license year. Such licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another except with the expressed approval of the licensing body of the city. (c)  A notice of each application for a license shall be advertised in the official gazette of the city once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the mayor and council that the application is to be acted upon. (Code 1980, § 7-2-5) 
Sec. 6-41. - Hours of operation.     The permitted hours of operation of retail licensees for the sale of malt beverages shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. weekdays, 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Sunday. The permitted hours of operation of wholesale licensee for the distribution of malt beverages within the city shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. There shall be no malt beverages sold or distributed within the city on any days prohibited by state law. (Code 1980, § 7-2-6; Ord. of 12-12-11(2)) 
Sec. 6-42. - Authority to issue licenses.     All applications for malt beverage licenses shall be presented to the mayor and council for approval, and if approved the licenses shall be issued by the city clerk upon the payment of the required fee. (Code 1980, § 7-2-7) 
Sec. 6-43. - Rules and regulations.     All the provisions of this article are and shall be subject to the regulations hereinafter prescribed by ordinance of the mayor and council as the same may be from time to time amended, setting forth the rules, terms and conditions upon which such licenses may be issued; the annual licensee fees; the qualifications of licensees; the restrictions on the business locations of licensees; the hours of operation of such licensees; the control of customers doing business with licensees; and any and all other matters which this body may deem it advisable to set forth for the proper regulation of the sale and consumption of malt beverages in this city; and all such licenses as may be hereafter issued shall be expressly subject to the provisions of such rules and regulations as may be then or thereafter in force; and all such licenses shall be nontransferable, except with express approval of the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 7-2-8) 
Sec. 6-44. - Distance requirements.     No retail malt beverage license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church and beyond 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, the same to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, as provided by law. Each application for a retail malt beverage license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. (Code 1980, § 7-2-9) 
Secs. 6-45—6-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WINE 
Sec. 6-76. - Retail licensee qualifications.     A retail wine licensee must be an adult person of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. (1)  The licensee shall not have been convicted within five years of the date of his application of a felony, or any violation of the laws of this state or any other state relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. (2)  The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. (3)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to the above and shall place same on file with the city clerk before any license is issued. (4)  If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements to these qualifications. (5)  No person shall be granted a license to engage in the sale of wine at retail unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the mayor and city council that such person shall be of good moral character. (6)  Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. (7)  A notice of each application for a license shall be advertised in the official gazette of the city once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the governing body that the application is to be acted upon. (Code 1980, § 7-2-21) 
Sec. 6-77. - Wholesale licenses.     Wholesale wine licenses shall be issued only to those parties who are licensed by the state to sell and distribute wine at wholesale. Application shall be made with the city clerk. (Code 1980, § 7-2-22) 
Sec. 6-78. - Regulations. (a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of wine at retail in the city, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: (1)  Sell wine to a minor. (2)  Sell wine to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. (3)  Sell wine upon the licensed premises or permit wine to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. (b)  In addition: (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any wine where such person does not have a license from the mayor and council to sell or possess for sale such beverages. (2)  Wine shall be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by no other means than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the mayor and council to make deliveries in the city. (3)  Transportation of wine by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of the wholesale permit. (4)  Dealers in wine shall not engage in the sale of such beverages on Sunday or any other days prohibited by state law. (5)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 7-2-23) 
Sec. 6-79. - Joint responsibility; sales to minors; possession by minors. (a)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess or attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase alcoholic beverages for a minor. (b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit faked, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages to which he is not legally entitled. (c)  No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sales to minors. (Code 1980, § 7-2-24) 
Sec. 6-80. - License fees. (a)  The applicant for a wholesale wine license shall pay to the city at the time of his license being issued a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk as an annual license fee for operation for one year beginning on February 1. The applicant for a retail license shall pay to the mayor and council at the time his license is received a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk as an annual license fee for operation for one year beginning on February 1. Such licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another and shall not be transferable from one location to another except with the expressed approval of the mayor and council. (b)  The license fee hereinbefore imposed shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city clerk within 24 hours after delivery based upon the units of wine sold during the previous 24 hours. Interest shall accrue on late payments at the rate of nine percent per annum. (c)  The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments and shall, upon request, render a sworn statement of the same accompanying sales report to the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 7-2-25) 
Sec. 6-81. - Hours of operation.     The hours of operation of retail licensees for the sale of wine shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. weekdays, 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. Sunday. The hours of operation of wholesale licensee for the distribution of wine within the city shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. There shall be no wine sold or distributed within the city limits on any days prohibited by state law. (Code 1980, § 7-2-26; Ord. of 12-12-11(2)) 
Sec. 6-82. - Authority to issue licenses.     All applications for wine licenses shall be presented to the mayor and council for approval, and if approved the licenses shall be issued by the mayor and council upon the payment of the required fee. (Code 1980, § 7-2-27) 
Sec. 6-83. - Rules and regulations.     All the provisions of this article are and shall be subject to the regulations hereinafter prescribed by ordinance of the mayor and council, as the same may be from time to time amended, setting forth the rules, terms and conditions upon which such licenses may be issued; the annual license fees; the prorated license fees, based on sales; the qualifications of licensees; the restrictions on business locations of licensees; the hours of operation of such licensees; the control of customers doing business with licensees; and any and all other matters that this body may deem it advisable to set forth for the proper control and regulation of the sale and consumption of wine in this city; and all such licenses as may be thereafter issued shall be expressly subject to the provisions of such rules and regulations as may be then or thereafter in force; and all such licenses shall be nontransferable except with express approval of the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 7-2-28) 
Sec. 6-84. - Distance requirements.     No retail wine license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church and beyond 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, the same to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, as provided by law. Each application for a retail wine license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. (Code 1980, § 7-2-29) 
Secs. 6-85—6-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INTOXICATING LIQUORS 
Sec. 6-116. - Qualifications of applicant.     No retail liquor license shall be granted to any person unless such person is of legal age and has been a resident of the county for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. (Code 1980, § 7-2-42; Ord. of 9-26-88, § 1) 
Sec. 6-117. - Interests in other licenses prohibited.     Only one retail liquor license shall be issued to any one person in the city, and no person who holds a retail liquor license in any other county or municipality of the state, shall be eligible to receive a retail liquor license. The term "persons" as used in this section shall include all members of such licensee's family, and the term "family" shall be deemed to include any person related to the holder of such license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law. (Code 1980, § 7-2-43) 
Sec. 6-118. - Number of licenses limited.     No more than four retail liquor licenses shall be issued at any time, and no more than four retail liquor licenses shall exist at any time. (Code 1980, § 7-2-44) 
Sec. 6-119. - Distance requirements.     No retail liquor license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church and beyond 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, the same to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, as provided by law. Each application for a retail liquor license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. (Code 1980, § 7-2-45) 
Sec. 6-120. - Each location requires license.     A separate retail liquor license shall be required for each place of business. (Code 1980, § 7-2-46) 
Sec. 6-121. - Building requirements.     No retail liquor license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of the building. Each applicant for a retail liquor license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. (Code 1980, § 7-2-47) 
Sec. 6-122. - Unbroken packages only to be sold.     All licensed retailers shall sell or offer to sell in the original unbroken package only and shall sell no package containing less than one-half pint. (Code 1980, § 7-2-48) 
Sec. 6-123. - Sales of other products; consumption on premises prohibited.     No retailer shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock, at his place of business where liquor is offered for sale, any other product or commodity except the following: (1)  Wines and beer when properly licensed. (2)  Beverages containing no alcohol commonly used to dilute distilled spirits. No beverages of any kind may be opened or consumed in such place of business. (Code 1980, § 7-2-49) 
Sec. 6-124. - Deliveries off premises prohibited.     No retailer shall sell or deliver any liquor to any person except in the retailer's place of business. (Code 1980, § 7-2-50) 
Sec. 6-125. - Hours and days of sales.     No retailer shall be in his place of business, or open his place of business, or furnish, sell or offer for sale any liquor (distilled spirits) at any of the following times: (1)  At any time on Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; (2)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the mayor and council; (3)  On Sunday before 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m.; and (4)  On any other day before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:45 p.m. (Code 1980, § 7-2-51; Ord. of 12-12-11(2)) 
Sec. 6-126. - Sales to certain persons prohibited.     No retailer shall give, sell or offer to sell any liquor to any person who is under the age of 21 years, or who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or who is an habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the retailer. At any time a state driver's license shall be considered the only legal proof of age that would relieve a person making a sale from responsibility thereof. (Code 1980, § 7-2-52) 
Sec. 6-127. - Sign; posting.     The holder of a license to sell liquor shall post in the most conspicuous place in his establishment a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF LIQUOR TO MINORS STRICTLY PROHIBITED." (Code 1980, § 7-2-53) 
Sec. 6-128. - Inventory restrictions.     No licensed retailer shall keep any liquor stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby liquor ordered by him is stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A retailer shall keep no inventory or stock of liquor at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business his storage space for liquor shall be immediately adjacent to the room in which he is licensed to do business. (Code 1980, § 7-2-54) 
Sec. 6-129. - Application for license.     Application for a retail liquor license shall be made on forms furnished by the governing authority as follows: (1)  A retail liquor license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon, and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year on or before January 15 of the preceding year. (2)  In addition to the completion and submission of application form as required by the mayor and council, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed application form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. (3)  Before any retail liquor license is granted, the applicant must post with the mayor and council, along with his application, a personal performance bond, such bond to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the mayor and council after a hearing is held by the mayor and council after a three days' written notice is given the violator. Such bond is to be payable to the mayor and council in the amount of $500.00, to be approved by the mayor and council and shall be executed in a form to be furnished. (4)  A notice of each application shall be advertised in the official gazette of the mayor and council once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the mayor and council that the application is to be acted upon. Such notice shall contain the address of the proposed location described in the application. (Code 1980, § 7-2-55) 
Sec. 6-130. - License fee; excise tax.     The annual fee for a retail liquor license shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license, such fee to accompany the application and shall be either in cash or a bank certified check. (Code 1980, § 7-2-56(a)) 
Sec. 6-131. - Financial responsibility of applicant.     Any applicant for a retail liquor license must show, to the satisfaction of the mayor and council, financial responsibility. (Code 1980, § 7-2-57) 
Sec. 6-132. - Additional qualifications of applicant.     Any applicant for a retail liquor license must be of good character, and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character or application will not be considered. (1)  No applicant for a license who has a criminal record (except minor traffic offenses) shall be granted a license. (2)  The mayor and council, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in its judgment circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. (Code 1980, § 7-2-58) 
Sec. 6-133. - Applications presented in person.     All applications for a retail liquor license shall be presented in person. (Code 1980, § 7-2-59) 
Sec. 6-134. - Licenses not transferable.     No retail liquor license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location; and if a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender his license to the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 7-2-60) 
Sec. 6-135. - Availability of regulations; liability for violations.     All holders of a license for the sale of liquor shall keep a copy of this article in his premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof, and each licensee or his agents selling liquor shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this article. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in any violation of this article or of the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. (Code 1980, § 7-2-61) 
Sec. 6-136. - Inspection authority of officials.     The business premises of the holder of a retail liquor license for the sale of liquor shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. (Code 1980, § 7-2-62) 
Sec. 6-137. - False statements on application.     The making of any statement on an application for license to sell liquor that shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license. (Code 1980, § 7-2-63) 
Sec. 6-138. - Age of employees.     No person under 21 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed under this article. (Code 1980, § 7-2-64) 
Sec. 6-139. - Prohibited acts.     There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, lotteries or tickets or chances therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensed retailer's place of business or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by the licensee; and any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. (Code 1980, § 7-2-65) 
Sec. 6-140. - Display of license.     Licenses under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which they were issued. (Code 1980, § 7-2-66) 
Sec. 6-141. - Compliance to laws and regulations.     No person shall engage in the sale of liquor in the city without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this article. Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this article shall be subject to revocation of his license and punishment as prescribed by the mayor and council. In addition to the rules and regulations hereinabove set out, each licensee doing business in the city under this article shall comply with all laws of the state, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits in the state; and any violation of same shall subject the licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his retail liquor license and also shall subject the licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances of the city. (Code 1980, § 7-2-67) 
Secs. 6-142—6-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSUMPTION ON-PREMISES 
Sec. 6-171. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     License means the authorization by the mayor and council to engage in the sale of and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages.     Licensee for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink on the premises means any person duly licensed to sell by the drink and for consumption only on the premises.     Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 25 persons. A lounge operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefor.     Nightclub means an establishment having a seating capacity of at least 25 persons with all booths and tables being unobstructed and open to view and providing a band and/or other professional entertainment, a minimum of 20 days per month, each month with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. All such nightclubs shall be equipped with air conditioning and shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for their patrons, provided that nightclubs located in hotels having dining room and kitchen facilities may be excluded from maintaining a kitchen in connection with such nightclub. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment, and the serving of food and of spirituous liquors shall be incidental thereto.     Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether a room, shop or building, wherein spirituous liquors shall be sold and consumed therein.     Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city at least one year immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 50 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly or semiannual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club.     Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 50 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. (Code 1980, § 7-2-81) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-172. - Compliance required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises without first complying with the rules and regulations set out in this article. (Code 1980, § 7-2-82) 
Sec. 6-173. - Application for license.     No alcoholic beverages shall be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises except under a license granted by the mayor and council. Application for a consumption on the premises license shall be made on forms provided by the mayor and council as follows: (1)  A consumption on the premises license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon, and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year. (2)  In addition to the completion and submission of the application form as required by the mayor and council, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed application form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. (3)  A notice of each application shall be advertised in the official gazette of the city once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the mayor and council that the application is to be acted upon. (4)  Any applicant for a consumption on the premises license must show, to the satisfaction of the mayor and council, financial responsibility. (Code 1980, § 7-2-83) 
Sec. 6-174. - Qualifications of applicants.     Any applicant for a consumption on the premises license must be of good character; and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character or the application will not be considered. Corporation applicants shall be of good business reputation. (1)  No applicant for a license who has a criminal record (except minor traffic offenses) shall be granted a license. (2)  The mayor and council, in its discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances that may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in its judgment circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. (Code 1980, § 7-2-84) 
Sec. 6-175. - Applications presented in person.     All applications for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be presented in person. (Code 1980, § 7-2-85) 
Sec. 6-176. - Additional qualifications of applicant.     No consumption on the premises license shall be granted to an individual unless such individual is of legal age and has been a resident of the city for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. (Code 1980, § 7-2-86) 
Sec. 6-177. - Licenses not transferable.     No consumption on the premises license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location; and if a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender his license to the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 7-2-87) 
Sec. 6-178. - Distance requirements.     No consumption on the premises license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church and beyond 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, the same to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, as provided by law. Each application for a consumption on the premises license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. (Code 1980, § 7-2-88) 
Sec. 6-179. - Each location requires separate license.     A separate consumption on the premises license shall be required for each place of business. (Code 1980, § 7-2-89) 
Sec. 6-180. - Building requirements.     No consumption on the premises license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building, clearly delineating the area therein, where spirituous liquors shall be sold and consumed, and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval by the building inspector when completed. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of the building. Each applicant for a consumption on the premises license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. All premises for which a consumption on the premises license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passage ways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. (Code 1980, § 7-2-90) 
Sec. 6-181. - Sales or deliveries off premises prohibited.     No licensee shall sell or deliver any liquor to any person except on the premises for which a license has been issued under this article. (Code 1980, § 7-2-91) 
Sec. 6-182. - Hours and days of sales.     No consumption on the premises licensee or any unlicensed person shall open his place of business and/or remain open, or furnish in any manner, sell, or offer for sale or give away any alcoholic beverages in or upon any such premises of the licensee or the premises of an unlicensed person at any of the following times: (1)  At any time on Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; (2)  On Sunday before 12:30 p.m. or after 12 midnight; and (3)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the mayor and council.     It shall be unlawful for any consumption on the premises licensee or any unlicensed person to keep open for business or admit the public to, or permit the public to remain within, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in or upon the premises in which the alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for a period of longer that one hour after the hours within which the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited.     Please note: The terms "consumption on the premises licensee" and "unlicensed person" as used in this chapter 6, section 182 do not refer to any holder of a business tax certificate or occupation tax certificate as levied by the city according to chapter 70, article VI of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Vienna as amended. (Code 1980, § 7-2-92; Ord of 12-12-11(1); Ord. of 3-27-17(2)) 
Sec. 6-183. - Sales to certain persons prohibited.     No consumption on the premises licensee shall give, sell or offer to sell any liquor to any person who is under the age of 21 years, or who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is obviously of unsound mind and such fact is known to the retailer, or who is an habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the retailer. At any time a state driver's license shall be considered the only legal proof of age that would relieve a person making a sale from responsibility thereof. (Code 1980, § 7-2-93) 
Sec. 6-184. - Inventory restrictions.     No consumption on the premises licensee shall keep any liquor stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby liquor ordered by him is stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of liquor at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business his storage space for liquor shall be immediately adjacent to the room in which he is licensed to do business. (Code 1980, § 7-2-94) 
Sec. 6-185. - Purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages restricted to certain amounts.     No consumption on the premises licensee may purchase distilled spirits in containers smaller than one-fifth gallon. The sale of distilled spirits by any consumption on the premises licensee in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. (Code 1980, § 7-2-95) 
Sec. 6-186. - License fee.     The annual fee for a consumption on the premises license shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license, such fee to accompany the application and shall be either in cash or a bank certified check. (Code 1980, § 7-2-96(a)) 
Sec. 6-187. - Familiarity with regulations; liability for violations.     All holders of a consumption on the premises license shall keep a copy of this article on his premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this article, and each licensee or his agents selling liquor shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this article. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in any violation of this article or of the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. (Code 1980, § 7-2-97) 
Sec. 6-188. - Inspection authority of officials.     The business premises of the holder of a consumption on the premises license for the sale of liquor shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. (Code 1980, § 7-2-98) 
Sec. 6-189. - False statements on application.     The making of any false statement on an application for a license to sell liquor for consumption on the premises shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license. (Code 1980, § 7-2-99) 
Sec. 6-190. - Age of employees.     No person under 21 years of age shall be employed on the premises for which a license is issued under this article in any capacity in any place of business licensed under this article. (Code 1980, § 7-2-100) 
Sec. 6-191. - Prohibited acts.     There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, lotteries or tickets or chances therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any consumption on the premises licensee's place of business or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by the licensee; and any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. (Code 1980, § 7-2-101) 
Sec. 6-192. - Display of license.     Licenses under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which the license was issued. (Code 1980, § 7-2-102) 
Sec. 6-193. - Sales of malt beverages and wine.     A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall also have the right to serve malt beverages or wine, provided he shall secure a license therefor. (Code 1980, § 7-2-103) 
Sec. 6-194. - Licenses issued only to certain types of establishments.     In addition to all other requirements, no license for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a private club, restaurant, hotel, nightclub, or lounge. (Code 1980, § 7-2-104) 
Sec. 6-195. - Penalties; revocation.     Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this article shall be subject to revocation of his license and punishment as prescribed by the mayor and council. In addition to the rules and regulations set out in this article, each licensee doing business in the city under this article shall comply with all laws of the state, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits in the state; and any violation of same shall subject the licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his retail liquor license and also shall subject the licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by laws and the ordinances of the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 7-2-105) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 9, 2014(1), amended ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-38, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1980, § 9-3-1; Ord. of Mar. 28, 1988, §§ 2—4, 7; and Ord. of Mar. 13, 2006. Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 46. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.     Abandonment means releasing or leaving an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of deserting the animal.     Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in the amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water consistent with the size, health and age of each particular animal in issue. (1)  Adequate food means palatable, non-contaminated and nutritionally adequate food that is appropriate for the species. Adequate food does not include garbage. (2)  Adequate water means clean fresh, portable water.     Adequate shelter means a structure having three sides, a top and bottom which is suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold, wind and rain and other elements. During cold weather, sufficient bedding inside the shelter shall be present.     Animal means any mammal, living thing, not a plant, other than man (excludes: rodents and insects).     Animal control officer means any person designated by the City of Vienna, a law enforcement officer, or agency for the purpose of administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, under the supervision of the chief of police.     Animal shelter means any facility operated by the City of Vienna or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.     Dangerous animal or vicious animal means a dog showing aggressive [behavior that]: (1)  Has inflicted injury on a human being or another animal without provocation on public or private property; or (2)  Has attached or endangered the safety of human being or another animal without provocation on public or private property; or (3)  Has bitten any person or another animal without provocation on public or private property.     Deprived animal means an animal which has not been provided by the owner or custodian thereof with adequate food and water, humane care, adequate sanitary shelter, adequate shelter from inclement weather or adequate ventilation or has been subject to cruel and inhumane treatment.     Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Vienna.     Guard dog means any trained or untrained dog that is maintained for the purpose of safety or security and which is reasonably expected to attack persons or other animals independently or upon command.     Humane care of animals means, but is not limited to, the provision of adequate shelter and wholesome and adequate food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the breed.     Inhumane care means any act, omission or neglect which causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death to any living animal.     Inoculation against rabies means the injections subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health, and administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian and a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the veterinarian.     Jurisdiction means, for the enforcement of this chapter, the corporate limits of the City of Vienna.     Leash is defined as a thong or line made from any material, except that any leash used as provided herein, may not exceed a length of eight feet.     Owner means any person, partnership or corporation owning, possessing, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for seven and/or more consecutive days.     Potential dangerous dog means any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten persons without provocation; or any dog that, when unprovoked: (1)  Chases or approaches a human being or another domestic animal on any public or private property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in any apparent attitude of attack; or (2)  Attempts to attack a human or another domestic animal.     Public nuisance means an animal shall be deemed to be a public nuisance if the animal: (1)  Is permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner or keeper without the express consent of such other property owner or occupant. (2)  Attacks or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways. (3)  Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion. (4)  Is repeatedly at large. (5)  Trespasses on school grounds. (6)  Damages property other than the owner thereof. (7)  Creates noxious or offensive odors which are detectable outside the property of the owner or custodian thereof. (8)  Creates an accumulation of excreta which has the potential of becoming an insect breeding site. (9)  Has no owner or custodian.     Records of appropriate authority means records of any county or municipal animal control agency, records of any county board of health, records of any federal, state or local courts, or records of an animal control officer provided in this chapter.     Restraint means any animal which is on a leash or at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's command, or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of the city, or in a fenced area within the real property limits of the owner. Invisible fence systems are allowed if they are maintained in good working order and keep the animal contained. The primary means of restraint within the property may not be by means of a chain, cable, rope or other stakeout or tie-out device.     Running at large means any animal which is off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Violation.     Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may be issued a citation for that violation to appear in the City of Vienna Municipal Court. Such a citation may be issued by an animal control officer, based on his own personal knowledge or upon a sworn written statement of more than one person who has witnessed the violation, in which case the witness shall be subpoenaed to testify for the City of Vienna in the court.     A schedule of fees and charges will be set by the administrator, police chief and animal control officer, with the approval of mayor and council. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-3. - Joint government services.     Any county or municipality or any combinations of such local governments may contract or enter into agreements with each other for joint animal control services and codes and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities and equipment used in the provision of such services. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-4. - Authority to remove abused or neglected animals.     Animal control officers shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect, as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The owner or possessor of the animal maybe charged accordingly. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-5. - Keeping of wild animals, livestock or fowl.     It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, keep or permit to be raised or kept on premises that he owns or controls within the City of Vienna, any wild non-domestic animal, or any cattle, horses, ponies, donkeys, mules, swine, goats, sheep, or fowl unless permitted by ordinance of the city. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1); Ord of 4-25-16(2)) 
Sec. 10-6. - Creation of nuisance.     It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance as defined in this chapter. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-7. - Cruelty to animals.     It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, cruelly ill-treat, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse any animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-8. - Abandonment.     It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-9. - Removal of waste.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to: (1)  Fail to immediately remove any excrement deposited by his animal on public property, walks, recreation areas or private property not owned or controlled by the owner of the animal. (2)  Fail to remove any excrement from their property and dispose of this waste on a daily basis. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-10. - Confinement and quarantine of biting animals.     Reserved. State Law reference— O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 19 and the Georgia Rabies Control Manual. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-11. - Rabies inoculation for dogs and cats.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat housed, kept or boarded within the incorporated limits of the city to not have the animal(s) inoculated against rabies, and to not have a rabies tag attached to animal's collar, worn at all times. The owner shall be liable for the inoculation of the animal. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-12. - Number of animals per resident lot.     It shall be unlawful for there to be more than three dogs and three cats on any residential lot subject to the following exceptions: (1)  Pet owners in compliance with any prior ordinance limiting the number of animals shall be allowed to continue to keep said number of animals. (2)  A litter of puppies or kittens will be permitted to remain on property for a period of 12 weeks after birth. (3)  Limitation does not apply to licensed foster home operators, breeders or other individuals who have been granted a waiver by the mayor and council consistent with the procedures and criteria outlined in section 10-13. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-13. - Waiver to animal limitations. (a)  Upon approval by the mayor and council, or appointee, a citizen may keep animals in greater numbers that are provided in section 10-12 of this chapter, provided that the mayor and council find that: (1)  There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances existing such that a waiver should be granted; (2)  Granting the waiver would not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to others; (3)  The waiver will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the neighborhood; and (4)  The applicant can demonstrate a special use or need to house animals in greater number that are provided in section 10-12. This item shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, participated in a licensed animal rescue organization, use of animals for therapeutics or other purposes, emergency care of pets owned by other persons, or other circumstances which are specified in the application waiver. (b)  Any waiver approved may be revoked upon the applicant being found in violation of the nuisance provisions of this article. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Secs. 10-14—10-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 
Sec. 10-34. - Animals subject to impoundment.     Any animal that is out of control or unattended or otherwise in violation of this article, whether or not the animal is on private or public property, may be impounded by the animal control officer in accordance with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Redemption of impounded animals.     It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the owner if the owner is known or can be reasonably ascertained, of every animal impounded, by telephone, if possible, or by mail, within two working days of the impoundment. The owner of any animal impounded may claim and take custody of the animal within four working days if such impoundment by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus the boarding fee and providing proof of rabies inoculation. If the animal is not current on rabies inoculation, the animal may be released to the owner and the owners shall have the animal inoculated within five working days and provide a copy of the rabies certificate to the animal control officer. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Impoundment fee.     All fees for impoundment under this article shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council. Impoundment fees are separate and distinct from penalties for violations of any part of this chapter. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-37. - Disposition of unclaimed animals.     The animal control officer shall be authorized to dispose of any animal impounded under this article in as humane and painless a manner as possible, or to donate any animal to a public or nonprofit institution or agency, if such animal has remained unclaimed for the prescribed period of time or if it has been injured and is suffering or in great pain and such animal does not display an identification tag and no determination of the owner, a decision may be made from a reasonable investigation. The disposal of any animal as provided in this section does not relieve the owner of any liability of any violation of this chapter. If the owner of any animal is known or ascertainable but for a valid reason cannot be reached within the four working-day period, the animal control officer shall be authorized to hold the animal until such time as the owner can be reached. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Secs. 10-38—10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOG[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, (Intergovernmental Contract). 
Sec. 10-41. - Dangerous dog.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dangerous or potential dangerous dog to fail to post prominent signage with the words "DANGEROUS DOG", easily read at a distance of 25 feet, at all entrance and exit locations to the property or building within which the dog is located. "Dangerous" or "vicious" animals shall be confined on a concrete surface, at least six inches thick, and confined by a fence of at least six feet in height, the sides of which are embedded into the ground, and the gate of which is secured by a child-proof lock. Any such dangerous animal, while off the real property of its owner or custodian, must be muzzled and secured by a leash or chain, and under control of owner or custodian. Dangerous and potential dangerous animals must be registered in accordance with the requirements of the State Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20—4-8-29. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Secs. 10-42—10-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOG LEASH 
Sec. 10-45. - Running at large; dog leash.     The owner of any domesticated carnivore located within the city must maintain such animal upon such owner's premises at all times, except that such animal may be removed from such owner's premises in any type of vehicle, or while leashed and under the complete control of the owner.     It shall be unlawful for any animal to be confined upon the premises of the owner or custodian of such animal by a leash or chain of less than ten feet in length and equipped with swivels at both ends, except by a leash which is a free running line. Any animal confined by leash or chain shall be restrained at least six feet from all entrance and exit locations to the property or building within which the animal is located. Animals shall not be restrained by leash or chain in any manner and location that precludes unrestricted and safe ingress by animal control or law enforcement personnel. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Sec. 10-46. - Tethering law.     A chain shall not be used to tether an animal unless the size and weight is approved in writing by the animal control officer or designee. Leashes made of cable, rope of [or] leather [in accordance] with Vienna, Georgia, Code of Ordinances, [and] the appropriate swivels may not be used. No animal on a tether shall be fitted with a choke collar or any other collar made of rope or chain unless such chain weights less than two pounds. (Ord. of 6-9-14(1)) 
Secs. 10-47—10-70. - Reserved. 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 34-136 et seq.; flood control, ch. 42; planning, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 82. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 14-1—14-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-10. - Vacant structures.     Vacant structures shall be maintained in good repair and be in compliance with all applicable laws, codes and ordinances. Any vacant structure shall at a minimum: (1)  Have all doors and windows and other openings weather-tight and secured against entry by the general public as well as animals. The vacant structure shall be secured by using the conventional methods used in the original construction. Where securing the structure through conventional methods is not feasible or where the owner desires to board up the vacant structure, the owner or interested party must obtain a separate boarding-up permit from the department of planning and development. (2)  All roof and roof flashings shall be sound and tight such that no rain will penetrate the structure and must allow for appropriate drainage so as to prevent deterioration of the interior walls or other interior portions of the structure. (3)  The structure must be maintained in good repair, be structurally sound and free of rubbish, garbage and other debris. (4)  Supporting members of the structure shall be capable of bearing both live and dead loads and the foundation walls likewise shall be capable of supporting an appropriate load. (5)  The exterior of the structure shall be free of loose or rotten materials as well as holes. Any exposed metal, wood or other surface shall be protected from the elements by appropriate weather coating materials (paint or similar treatment). (6)  All balconies, canopies, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes or other overhanging extensions shall be in good repair and appropriately anchored. The exposed metal and wood surface of such overhanging extensions shall also be protected from the elements against rust or decay by appropriate application of paint or similar weather coating. (7)  Any accessories or appurtenant structures, including but not limited to garages, sheds or other storage facilities shall meet the standards set forth in this section. (8)  Have a plan for winterization of the vacant property if necessary. (9)  Retaining walls, drainage systems, or other structures must be maintained in good repair and be structurally sound. Any existing fence shall be maintained in good repair. (10)  Be in compliance withal applicable provisions of chapter 14 of the City of Vienna Code of Ordinances and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the City of Vienna. (Ord. of 4-25-16(3)) 
Sec. 14-11. - Boarding-up structures. (a)  Boarding-up permit. No person, firm, association or corporation shall erect, install, place, or maintain boards over doors, windows or other opening of any building or structure or otherwise secure such opening by any means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure without first obtaining a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with this subsection. Any properties with boards existing at the time of the adoption of this section will have 60 days from the date of adoption of this section to submit an application to the department of planning and development for a permit to continue to board. (b)  The department of planning and development may issue a boarding-up permit only upon satisfaction of the following conditions: (1)  Submission of a written application by the owner of the property or his authorized representative, including the following information: a.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner; b.  Name, address and telephone number of any local agent of the owner; c.  Tax parcel identification number of the premises on which the structure is situated; d.  Common address of the structure; e.  Other information as may be required by the department. (2)  Submission of a written statement or plan by the owner of the property or his authorized representative specifying: a.  Length of time the owner expects the boarding-up to continue; b.  Proposed plan to secure or board up the structure, including a detailed description regarding the manner and materials; c.  Proposed maintenance plan detaining the monitoring and maintenance of the structure and premises in conformance with this section. (3)  The city may conduct an inspection of the subject property to ensure that the structure is boarded up in accordance with the plan approved by the department of planning and development. (c)  A boarding-up permit issued pursuant to this section shall authorize the boarding-up or other securing of a building or structure for a period of six months. An owner of a property desiring to continue to board his property beyond the six-month term must submit a renewal application to renew the boarding-up permit and continue to meet requirements for the issuance of a new boarding-up permit. The permit may be renewed within 30 days of the expiration of the original upon payment of necessary fees. A new permit must be obtained if the original permit is not renewed within 30 days of the expiration of the original permit. (d)  No boarding-up permit shall be required to board-up a building for up to 30 days in the event of a temporary emergency situation, including but not limited to damage caused by vandalism, theft or weather. In the event an emergency situation requires a building or structure to be boarded-up for more than 30 days, the owner of the building or structure or his authorized representative must obtain a valid building permit for repair or a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with this section. (e)  The boarding of doors, windows or other openings of any building or structure or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall be according to the specifications approved under the permit. All boarded openings shall be painted with a minimum of two coats of exterior paint, which is of a color compatible with the exterior of the building or structure. (f)  Any structure which is boarded shall be in compliance withal applicable codes and ordinances of the City of Vienna. (g)  Any structure which is boarded up shall be posted with the name, permit information, and twenty-four hour contact phone number of the local agent. (Ord. of 4-25-16(3)) 
Sec. 14-12. - Burned structures.     Whenever any building or structure is partially burned, the owner or person in control shall, within 30 days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property, remove from the premises all refuse, debris, and all charred and partially burned lumber and material. If such building or structure shall be burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner or person in control shall, within 60 days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property, remove from the premises all the remaining portion of the building or structure. If the building or structure is to be repaired, a permit shall be obtained and work shall begin within 120 days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property and shall be completed within 240 days from the date a permit is obtained. (Ord. of 4-25-16(3)) 
Secs. 14-13—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 
Sec. 14-31. - Adopted. (a)  The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced by the city: (1)  Standard Building Code. (2)  Standard Mechanical Code. (3)  Standard Gas Code. (4)  Standard Plumbing Code. (5)  National Electrical Code. (6)  Standard Fire Prevention Code. (7)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code. (8)  Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings. (b)  The following appendixes of the codes adopted in subsection (a) of this section are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: (1)  Standard Building Code: Appendix. (2)  Standard Mechanical Code: Appendix. (3)  Standard Gas Code: Appendix. (4)  Standard Plumbing Code: Appendix. (5)  Standard Fire Prevention Code: Appendix. (6)  National Electrical Code: Appendix. (7)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code: Appendix. (c)  The latest edition of the following codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: (1)  Standard Excavation and Grading Code, including Chapter 1, Administration. (2)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, including Chapter 1, Administration. (3)  Standard Housing Code, including Chapter 1, Administration and Appendix. (4)  Standard Swimming Pool Code, including Chapter 1, Administration. (5)  Standard Existing Building Code, including Chapter 1, Administration and Appendix. (6)  Standard Amusement Device Code, including Chapter 1, Administrative and Appendix. (Code 1980, §§ 6-2-1—6-2-6) State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 
Sec. 14-32. - Permit and inspection fees.     Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 14-33. - Public utilities. (a)  No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connection, for construction purposes, unless the contractor has been issued a construction permit by the chief building official. (b)  No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. (c)  No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
Sec. 14-34. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities. (a)  Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. (b)  Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the board of health. State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas and conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1. 
Secs. 14-35—14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
Sec. 14-66. - Purpose of article.     It is the purpose of this article to require the use of ultra-low flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; to require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; to promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water; to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and to reduce wastewater flows. 
Sec. 14-67. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial building means any type of building other than residential.     Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building.     Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators.     Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel.     Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste.     Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. (Ord. of 6-10-91, § 1) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-68. - Standards for fixtures.     No plumbing fixture shall be installed that does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 14-70. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings the effective date shall be July 1, 1992. (1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: a. Toilets 1.6 gallons per flush b. Urinals 1.0 gallon per flush c. Showerheads 2.5 gallons per minute, at 60 psi gauge pressure d. Kitchen faucets 2.5 gallons per minute e. Bathroom and lavatory faucets 2.0 gallons per minute  (2)  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. (3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. (4)  The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.IM-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. (5)  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low-consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. (Ord. of 6-10-91, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 14-69. - Product certification.     The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 14-68 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the city building official. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
Sec. 14-70. - Exceptions.     Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 14-68 for the following: (1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. (2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. (3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution, which may require more water for proper operation. (4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes that cannot be accommodated by existing technology. (Ord. of 6-10-91, § 5) 
Sec. 14-71. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article.     This article shall be enforced by the city development department. Citations for violations may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, such person, corporation, partnership or other entity found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. (Ord. of 6-10-91, § 6) 
Secs. 14-72—14-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INTERSTATE SIGNS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 14-106. - Application.     This article shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs abutting or visible from the Interstate 75 right-of-way in the city. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § I(1)) 
Sec. 14-107. - Compliance required.     No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § I(2)) 
Sec. 14-108. - Construction materials.     Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § I(3)) 
Sec. 14-109. - Compliance with state law required.     All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the Interstate 75 right-of-way shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 95A-913 et seq. (The Georgia Outdoor Advertising Code) and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under the code. In instances where the sign controls of this article are more strict, these regulations shall apply. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § I(4)) 
Sec. 14-110. - Removal of signs advertising discontinued activities.     Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product or service that has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of the activity, business, product or service. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § I(5)) 
Sec. 14-111. - Prohibited signs. (a)  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of the governmental traffic signs. (b)  No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. (c)  Signs painted or attached to natural features such as trees or rocks, telephone poles, utility poles or fenceposts are prohibited. (d)  Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited. (e)  Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument, are prohibited. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § II) 
Secs. 14-112—14-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC TYPES OF SIGNS 
Sec. 14-136. - Home occupation signs.     One nonilluminated professional or business nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(1)) 
Sec. 14-137. - Signs of work under construction.     One nonilluminated sign not exceeding 40 square feet in area displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, the financial, selling and development agencies is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration or removal. Such sign shall be removed from the site within 30 days after the completion of the project. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(2)) 
Sec. 14-138. - Temporary subdivision signs.     Temporary signs, not exceeding 40 square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development, are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart. They shall be removed when 75 percent of the lots are conveyed. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(3)) 
Sec. 14-139. - Private directional signs.     Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for or in process of development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder or agent, may be erected and maintained, provided: (1)  The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet, and not in excess of four feet in length; and (2)  Not more than one such sign is erected on each 500 feet of right-of-way frontage. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(4)) 
Sec. 14-140. - Roof signs.     No more than one roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than 25 feet above the elevation of the roof. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(5)) 
Sec. 14-141. - Wall signs.     Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements: (1)  Signs on the front surface of a building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed 25 percent of the front surface of the building. (2)  Signs on the side and rear surface of a building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of building shall not exceed 50 percent of the exterior side of rear surface of the building respectively. (3)  Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than 24 inches from the wall. Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five feet. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(6)) 
Sec. 14-142. - Illuminated signs.     Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district, or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(7)) 
Sec. 14-143. - Outdoor advertising signs.     Outdoor advertising signs shall meet the following requirements: (1)  Uniform size. The outside measurements of all such signs shall be 12 feet in height and 50 feet in length, with or without trim. (2)  Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base-mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. (3)  Height above interstate grade. All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Two signs in the same location (back-to-back) or "V" formation shall be the same height above the interstate's surface. (4)  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. (5)  Number of signs per location. Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side-by-side) facing the same direction. (6)  Spacing. Sign locations shall be no less than 500 feet apart measuring from the two closest points. (7)  Distance from property or right-of-way line. Sign structures shall be no less than ten feet from any property or right-of-way line. (8)  Outdoor advertising signs per quadrant. Three outdoor advertising signs per quadrant of an interchange adjacent to the interstate highway are allowed. These signs must be located on an area zoned commercial or industrial as specified in state law and are restricted to an area 1,200 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main-traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. (9)  Marsh and historic area locations prohibited. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland or an area of designated historic interest. (10)  Advertisement limitations. Outdoor advertising shall be limited to the following: a.  Travel service facilities, including lodgings, gas, food, camping; b.  Areas of scenic beauty; c.  Public attractions, including historic, natural, scientific or recreational amenities; and d.  Any combination of the above-listed facilities. Further, the content of all advertising shall be directional in nature. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(8)) 
Sec. 14-144. - On-premises signs.     On-premises signs located within 100 feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and located on the same property and for sale or for lease signs located on the property being advertised are permitted. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(9)) 
Sec. 14-145. - Nonconforming signs.     Any legally erected sign that would become nonconforming as a result of this article shall be allowed to remain until purchased by the department of transportation or the city, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such signs. (Ord. of 5-24-82, § III(10)) 
Chapters 15 - BUSINESS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 15-1—15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BED AND BREAKFAST ORDINANCE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 8, 2012, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 15-31—15-39, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. of Jan. 14, 2008. 
Sec. 15-31. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Bed and breakfast means a structure occupied by its owners who shall be the operators, wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast are provided to guests, who limit their stay to not more than seven consecutive nights, for compensation. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of an owner and an owner shall live in the structure when the bed and breakfast operation is in operation. (Ord. of 10-8-12(1)) 
Sec. 15-32. - Guest register.     Each operator shall keep a register of all guests of the bed and breakfast operation, which shall include the names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests at the inn. Such list shall be available for inspection by the city or its agents at all reasonable times. (Ord. of 10-8-12(1)) 
Sec. 15-33. - Materials needed for license application.     An applicant for a bed and breakfast license shall submit the following materials for review: (1)  A floor plan for the single-family dwelling unit, illustrating that the proposed operation will comply with all ordinances and regulations of the city, and all other governmental agencies or bodies. (2)  A completed and signed application form along with the required fee submitted to the City of Vienna Zoning Board of Appeals requesting a special exception use by the owner/owners. (3)  A completed and signed business license application along with the required fee submitted to Vienna City Hall Licensing Department by the owner/owners. (Ord. of 10-8-12(1)) 
Sec. 15-34. - Inspection of premises.     No bed and breakfast license shall be granted to any applicant until the bed and breakfast premises has been inspected by the city building inspector, who finds that the electrical and plumbing systems of the premises are in safe and satisfactory condition. (Ord. of 10-8-12(1)) 
Sec. 15-35. - License period.     All licenses granted under this article shall be issued for a period of one year, or until December 31 of the year the application is made, whichever date is earlier. (Ord. of 10-8-12(1)) 
Sec. 15-36. - Financial records.     All license holders shall maintain a separate record which show all activities of their bed and breakfast operation and shall keep a profit and loss statement. All of such documents and related papers shall be available to the city or its agents at all reasonable times. (Ord. of 10-8-12(1)) 
Sec. 15-37. - Proximity to other establishments.     No bed and breakfast shall be nearer than 500 feet from another bed and breakfast as measured from the entrance of each establishment via the nearest street or streets within the city, unless approved by the City of Vienna Zoning Board of Appeals as part of its issuance of its special exception use. (Ord. of 10-8-12(1)) 
Sec. 15-38. - Conditions for operation.     No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast operation unless all of the following conditions have been met: (1)  There shall be no more than four bedrooms per dwelling used for a bed and breakfast operation, unless approved by the Vienna City Council. (2)  Indoor lavatories and bathing facilities must be available to all guests using any bed and breakfast operation. (3)  Only one sign made out of wood or wood-like material measuring no larger than two square feet shall be allowed on the subject real property. (4)  Adequate off-street parking shall be available for the bed and breakfast to be permitted. (5)  No cooking by guests shall be allowed. (6)  The entire dwelling unit shall contain at least 2,500 square feet of heated living area and shall be detached from any other dwelling. (7)  There shall be no outside evidence of bed and breakfast operation. The exterior architectural features and architectural design of the building used as a bed and breakfast inn must be maintained and must be in keeping with the general architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to ensure the safety of the structure, shall be made to the dwelling for the purpose of providing a bed and breakfast inn. (8)  No more than one nonfamily worker shall be employed at the operation, exclusive of maintenance personnel. (9)  Alcoholic beverages, beer and/or wine shall not be sold to any guest at the premises. (10)  The bed and breakfast may serve its guests only breakfast (morning meal) and dinner (evening meal) at the inn, and no other meal shall be served, except that the owner/occupant of the inn shall not be subject to this requirement for their own meals. (11)  The owner/operator of the bed and breakfast shall comply with all business license, building permit requirements, and revenue collection ordinances of the city and the state, and health maintenance regulations, ordinances, laws and codes of the city and State of Georgia. (Ord. of 10-8-12(1)) 
Secs. 15-39—15-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITIES AND FACILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 15-66. - Intent and purpose.     The City of Vienna is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, paragraph 1(City), 2(County) and/3(both) of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 (36-34-2) and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6) (32-4-92), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. (Ord. No. 67, art. I, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-67. - Scope.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. (Ord. No. 67, art. I, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-68. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.     City means the City of Vienna, Georgia.     City council means the legislative governing body of the city.     Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Vienna, Georgia.     Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install wires, install conduit, install pipes, install transmission lines, install poles, install signs, or install facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the rights-of-way.     Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs, or installing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the rights-of-way.     Director means the Director of the Department of Public Works of the City of Vienna, Georgia, or his or her designee.     Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health or safety, or of a significant loss of real or personal property.     Excavation means any work in the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, opening the public rights-of-way; installing, servicing, repairing or modifying any facility in or under the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public rights-of-way.     Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to, a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical conductors, conduits, ducts, inner ducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and future technology authorized in a permit or written service agreement.     Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations.     FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto.     Registration means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public rights-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written service agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances;     Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. Rights-of-way shall not include, buildings, parks, bridges, river, tunnel, viaduct, conduit or other public property or easements that have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property is specifically granted in a permit or by law. Rights-of-way shall not include private easements or public property, except to the extent the use or occupation of public property is specifically granted in a written approval of registration.     Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city.     Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, there over or thereunder, and any portion thereof.     Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests.     Underground facilities means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults, wires and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially underneath rights-of-way.     Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities.     Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, servicer, contractor, subcontractor or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility.     Working day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday excluding legal holidays observed by the city. (Ord. No. 67, art. I, 7-28-08) 
Secs. 15-69—15-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 15-91. - Rights-of-way registration. (a)  Administration. The Administrator of the City of Vienna or his/her designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this article except as otherwise provided herein. (b)  Rights-of-way occupancy registration. (1)  Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of this article. (2)  Following the effective of this article, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in any rights-of-way under the control of city, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a notification of construction with the department. (c)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: (1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the permit registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained or repaired in the rights-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; (2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. (3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits or agreements. (4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. (d)  Issuance of written acceptance of registration. (1)  If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. (2)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining the permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. (e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the rights-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. (Ord. No. 67, art. II, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-92. - Notification to city of construction. (a)  Notification required. Written notification to the director from the utility is required prior to any of the following activities: (1)  Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate facilities on, along, over or under the rights-of-way in the city; or (2)  Construction adjacent to the rights-of-way in the city that require tree trimming within the rights-of-way. (b)  Notification procedure. The written notification shall be submitted on a form provided by the director and shall specifically include: (1)  The name and address of the utility; (2)  The nature, extent and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; (3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; (4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); (5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; (6)  The estimated cost of the project; (7)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. (c)  Locate requests required. As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended. No utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. (Ord. No. 67, art. III, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-93. - Conditions of street occupancy.     Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this section may result in revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. (1)  The "1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual", including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Vienna municipal equivalents. (2)  Protection of traffic and roadway. In conformance with city policy, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. (3)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city rights-of-way are changed at any time during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon at least ten business days notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. (4)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. (Ord. No. 67, art. V, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-94. - Restoration of property.     A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, there under or there over or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. (Ord. No. 67, art. VI, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-95. - Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities. (a)  A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall: (1)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this article and any other provision in the codified ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; or (2)  Submit a written proposal to reuse its facilities; or (3)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities. Said proposal must be approved by the director; or (4)  Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or (5)  Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option do one or more of the following: a.  Purchase the facilities; b.  Accept donation of some or all facilities; or c.  Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. (b)  Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the rights-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. (Ord. No. 67, art. VII, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-96. - Termination of registration. (a)  The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The director shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: (1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the city, state or federal government; (2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; (3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or (4)  Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration. (b)  If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: (1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. (2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated. (Ord. No. 67, art. VIII, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-97. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. (a)  No utility shall use the rights-of-way to operate any facilities that have not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this article. (b)  No utility shall place or have placed any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this article. (c)  Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this article continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. (d)  No utility shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this article continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. (Ord. No. 67, art. IX, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 15-98. - Other provisions. (a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (b)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or which may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written approval of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. (c)  Compliance. No utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance. (d)  Appeals. All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director of public service as specified in this article. (e)  Codification. This article shall be codified in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia. (f)  Chapter headings. Chapter headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article. (g)  Effective date. This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the Mayor and Council of the City of Vienna. (Ord. No. 67, art. X, 7-28-08) 
Secs. 15-99—15-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sec. 15-126. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot be de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments this article represents a balancing of competing interests: Reduced criminal activity; and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-127. - Definitions.     The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: (1)  Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. (2)  Adult business: a.  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or b.  An other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. c.  Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. d.  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. e.  Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. f.  Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. g.  Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. h.  Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or their reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. i.  Erotic dance establishments means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features the performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. j.  Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. k.  Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency, or persons, who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. l.  Good moral character: A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, within the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. m.  Minor means, for the purposes of this article any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. n.  Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: Analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, saphism, zooerasty; or 2.  Clearly depicts human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 4.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. o.  Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the aureola; or 2.  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-128. - Erotic dance establish regulations. (a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. (b)  No later than February 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment license shall file a verified report with the city administrator or his/her designee showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. (c)  An erotic dance establishment license shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. (d)  No adult entertainment establishment license shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. (e)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. (f)  An erotic establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 1:00 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to open on Christmas Day or on Sundays. (g)  No erotic dance establishment licenses shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, malt beverage, wine, any other alcoholic beverage, or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. (h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. (i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. (j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. (k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. (l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. (m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. (n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-129. - Certain activities prohibited.     No person, firm partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-130. - Permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct, or carry on in or permit upon any premises within the City of Vienna any of the adult entertainment establishments as defined in this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or of the United States. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-131. - Operation of unlicenced premises unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishments unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-132. - Admission of minors unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises as such license if issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-133. - Sales to minors unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult business or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-134. - Location.     No adult entertainment establishment, business, or use shall be located within 1,000 feet, measured from the closest point of the real property on which the adult entertainment establishment is sought to be erected and operated in a straight line to the closest point of the real property of the following: (1)  Any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; (2)  A church, school, government owned or operated public facility, library, public park or hospital; (3)  Any other adult entertainment establishment; (4)  Any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.     If the adult entertainment establishment or the activity to which a measurement is required is a part of a tract of land occupied by other uses the measurements shall be from the closest point of the total tract of land(s) and not the building(s) in which the activities are located. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-135. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. (a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime that is a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than the licensed premises. (b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises he shall file a notice with the city administrator or his/her designee and shall receive approval of such employment from the city administrator or his/her designee requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular City of Vienna, County of Dooly, State of Georgia, or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city administrator or his/her designee in writing for a hearing. The decision of the city administrator or his/her designee after hearing may be appealed to the mayor and city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city administrator or his/her designee evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. (c)  Suspension and/or revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the City of Vienna, laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. (d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-136. - Application for permit. (a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city administrator or his/her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, shall be paid to the city administrator or his/her designee to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city administrator or his/her designee shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city administrator or his/her designee at the time such application is submitted. (b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-137. - Application contents.     Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: (1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; (2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; (3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence of each; (4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; (5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; (6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; (7)  Business, occupation and employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; (8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has such license, has such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; (9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; (10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; (11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; (12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein before specified as required to be set forth in the application; (13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; (14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms or disposition have been fully completed; (15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish nine fingerprints of the applicant; (16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; (17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the applicant if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or crime not a felony involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city administrator or his/her designee shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; (18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; (19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; (20)  A plat by a registered surveyor or engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; (21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; b.  If by partnership, by the manager or general partner; c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-138. - Applicant to appear.     The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the City of Vienna and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-139. - Application; investigation.     The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city administrator or his/her designee may grant the permit if it finds: (1)  The required fee has been paid; (2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; (3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; (4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; (5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of any attempt or commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, it committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; (6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; (7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; (8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; (9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; (10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; (11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; (12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Vienna, State of Georgia or the United States; (13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to inure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Vienna or the preservation of its neighborhoods. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-140. - Persons prohibited as licensees. (a)  No license provided by this article shall be issued to or held by: (1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; (2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; (3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; (4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; (5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; (6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia or the City of Vienna. (b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. Permit—Refusal; appeal. (c)  If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city administrator or his/her designee of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city administrator or his/her designee. The city administrator or his/her designee shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-141. - Same—Renewal.     Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-142. - Same—Nontransferable.     No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized buy not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-143. - Change of location or name. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator or his/her designee and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the City Code have been met. (b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. (c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-144. - Appeal procedure. (a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit in writing a notice of appeal to the city administrator or his/her designee. (b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and city council and the name and address of the applicant. (c)  The city administrator or his/her designee shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular mayor and city council meeting occurring not less than five, nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for mayor and city council action. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-145. - Same—Mayor and city council determines procedure.     When an appeal is placed on the mayor and city council agenda, the mayor and city council may take either of the following actions: (1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city administrator or his/her designee to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; (2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city administrator or his/her designee shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-146. - Mayor and city council hearing.     Whenever the city administrator or his/her designee has scheduled an appeal before the mayor and city council, at the time and date set therefore, the mayor and city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the mayor and city council shall be final. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-147. - Powers of hearing officer.     The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hearing testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-148. - Rules of evidence inapplicable.     The mayor and city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional Superior Court rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-149. - Hearing officer—Report. (a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the mayor and city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city administrator or his/her designee and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city administrator or his/her designee, with additional copies furnished to the chief of police. (b)  The city administrator or his/her designee shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular mayor and city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-150. - Same—Action by mayor and city council.     The mayor and city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the mayor and city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: (1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; (2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-151. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.     Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained, contrary to the provisions of the ordinance shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in additional to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction or grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-152. - Cleaning of licensed premises.     Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. The activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-153. - Self-inspection of licensed premises.     The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city administrator or his/her designee. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-154. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions.     A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city administrator or his/her designee on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city administrator or his/her designee shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violations and order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city administrator or his/her designee may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city administrator or his/her designee. The city administrator or his/her designee shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 15-155. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance.     A licensed premises or any part thereof, may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. (Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Secs. 15-156—15-180. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - CEMETERIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 18-1. - Generally.     For the mutual protection and benefit of every lot purchaser in the city cemetery, the rules and regulations included in this chapter are adopted. All property owners within the cemetery and all lots hereafter to be sold shall be subject to this chapter. (Code 1980, § 4-3-1(intro. ¶)) 
Sec. 18-2. - Opening graves. (a)  A request in writing is required of the lot owner or authorized funeral director before a grave is to be opened, giving the name and location of the grave in reference to the lot. The name of the individual or firm and the approximate time of the grave opening shall be given. (b)  A request in writing is required for any type work or improvements done on any lot. This request must be filed at city hall before any type of work is begun. The request should state the nature of the work, the lot owner, the name of the company or individual doing work, and the date and time the work is to begin. A signed permit will be issued by the city authorizing approved work. Any person doing any work in the cemetery without written approval by the city shall be subject to a penalty or fine in the amount of $25.00. (Code 1980, § 4-3-1(1)) 
Sec. 18-3. - Disposal of waste.     Excess dirt and waste in the cemetery will be disposed of at sites to be determined by an official of the city. No dirt will be allowed to be placed along side any fencing, walks or roads unless approval is given by an official of the city. (Code 1980, § 4-3-1(2)) 
Sec. 18-4. - Plantings.     No shrubs, trees and herbage, except grass, may be planted in the cemetery unless authorized by the city. (Code 1980, § 4-3-1(3)) 
Sec. 18-5. - Memorials.     No memorial, such as family marker, grave marker, slab or corner post, shall be placed in the cemetery either on a grave or lot unless it is made of concrete, marble, granite or bronze. Corner posts or nameplates shall be placed flush with the finished grade of the surrounding ground. (Code 1980, § 4-3-1(4)) 
Sec. 18-6. - Driving trucks on lots.     All trucks, such as used by gravediggers, monument erectors, and other workers, driving on cemetery lots must have some support under their wheels before driving onto lots. (Code 1980, § 4-3-1(5)) 
Sec. 18-7. - Workers' responsibility for cleanup.     Any person doing any type of work such as gravedigging, monument erecting, coping installation, slab installation, and similar activities, shall be responsible for the cleaning and removal of any waste, broken concrete, slabs, dirt, and other materials and disposal of waste material in a proper place and not in the cemetery. (Code 1980, § 4-3-1(6)) 
Sec. 18-8. - Care of inside lots.     The neatness and proper care of inside lots in the cemetery bordered by coping shall be the responsibility of the lot owner; and the owner shall keep the inside lot cut and free of high grass, weeds, shrubs, and other growth. (Code 1980, § 4-3-1(7)) 
Sec. 18-9. - Burial vault.     It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in the cemetery any burial vault that is not placed at least 12 inches below the surface of the ground. (Code 1980, § 4-3-2) 
Sec. 18-10. - Maintenance.     The City of Vienna Cemetery on Woodward Street has been well maintained and unkempt for many years. There is historic significance within the Vienna City Cemetery, and in an effort to pertain and record this history, and a continuous effort to maintain the cemetery, an opening/closing grave fee will be administered and collected from any one performing activities within the cemetery. (1)  Any person doing any type of work in the Vienna City Cemetery must notify city hall. A signed permit will be issued by the city authorizing work. All funeral homes are subject to an opening and closing assessment of $100.00 to be payable before services. (2)  All vault companies not obtaining a permit under a funeral home will be required to obtain a permit from the City of Vienna of $50.00. This fee will be due before any work of admittance into city cemetery. (3)  Any person doing work without approval will be subject to a penalty or fine. (4)  No shrubs or trees may be planted in the cemetery. All existing shrubs and trees will be removed. No walking or vehicle traffic should be in the cemetery after dark. (5)  All work performed within the city cemetery should be done according to city ordinance. A copy will be provided as requested. (Ord. of 7-8-02) 
Sec. 18-11. - Lot rates.     Be it ordained by the City Council of Vienna and it is hereby ordained by the authority thereof that the following rates shall be adopted as the cemetery lot rates for the Vienna Cemetery to become effective July 9, 2002: One Grave lot: $150.00 (Ord. of 7-8-02) 
Secs. 18-12—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NORTHWEST SECTION OF THE VIENNA CITY CEMETERY[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 9, 2014(2), set out provisions intended for use as a new ch. 19. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, with the concurrence of the city and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included under ch. 18, Cemeteries, as art. II, §§ 18-31—18-49. 
Sec. 18-31. - Generally.     For the mutual protection and benefit of every lot purchaser in the Northwest Section of the city cemetery, the rules and regulations included in this chapter are adopted. All property owners and visitors within the cemetery and all lots hereafter to be sold shall be subject to this chapter formulated and adopted by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-32. - Allotment of space.     No allotment of space in the city cemeteries shall be made except upon application to the city administrator, signed by the person in whose name the allotment is to be made. Every such application shall contain a stipulation to the effect that, in consideration of the allotment of the space so applied for, the applicant shall abide by all the rules and regulations made and hereafter enacted by the city council for the management and control of cemeteries. Every allotment of space in the city cemeteries shall be deemed to be made subject to the condition that all such rules and regulations shall be complied with. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-33. - Sale of lots generally.     The city administrator/city clerk shall be responsible for the plat for each cemetery, and shall sell the lots and graves at such price as set by the mayor and council. Giving a receipt thereof to the purchaser, specifying the number and location thereof, and enter the same on his/her records. Such receipt and entry shall give the purchaser a title to the lot or grave, subject to such regulations as the council may establish for the government of the cemetery. All grave spaces or lots in city-designated cemeteries shall be sold to any and all persons regardless of race, creed, color, nationality or religious belief. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-34. - Interments, disinterments and cremains. (a)  Interments and disinterments. (1)  Properties shall not allow interments to be made in their lots for remuneration, nor shall any transfer or assignment of any lot or of any interest in a lot be valid without the written consent of the city. (2)  No disinterments shall be allowed except by consent of the city, and upon the written order of the owners of the lot. (3)  No lot shall be used for any other purpose than for the burial of the human dead. (b)  Cremains. (1)  In the event of cremated (urn) remains: a.  Only one cremated (urn) remains may be buried in one grave space if that grave space at the time of burial contains one coffin remains. b.  No more than two cremated (urn) remains may be buried in one grave space. If the grave space contains two cremated (urn) remains no other adult remains can be buried in the grave space. c.  If one cremated (urn) remains is buried in the grave space only one adult coffin remains can be buried in the grave space. (2)  The owner of the grave space in the Northwest Section of the cemetery may provide for and/or install a ground-flush pillow grave marker or a ground-flush foot marker for the cremated remains. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-35. - Grave site opening: permit required. (a)  A request in writing is required of the lot owner or authorized funeral director before a grave is to be opened, giving the name and location of the grave in reference to the lot. A permit fee of $100.00 and an opening and closing fee of $225.00 will be due and payable to the City of Vienna before any grave in the Northwest Section shall be opened by the city's contracted agent. (b)  The burial permit shall be obtained a minimum of 24 hours in advance of said site opening. Said notice may be waived by the city administrator in extenuating circumstances. (c)  All funeral homes are required to verify that all fees have been submitted to the City of Vienna. Graves shall be opened and closed by the contracted agent of the city and shall conform to all applicable state laws. Only the city's contracted agent shall open and close any graves in the Northwest Section of the Vienna City Cemetery. (d)  Under no circumstances shall any party attempt to open a grave site prior to proper identification by the City of Vienna. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-36. - Grave opening. (a)  Dimensions. All gravesites shall have an opening sufficient in size to accommodate the vault. (b)  Groundcover. All graves shall be dug to a depth sufficient to allow a minimum groundcover of 12 inches. (c)  Soil removal methods. In no event shall the removal of excess material result in the damage to surrounding lots, nor cause ruts to develop, nor cause damage to surrounding monuments, etc. In the event of such damage, the person, firm or corporation responsible shall pay to the City of Vienna its cost of repair of such damage. (d)  Soil compaction. All gravesites opened shall have the soil returned to the site compacted to prevent settling of such soil after completion of the burial. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-37. - Disposal of waste.     All excess soil removed from a gravesite shall be deposited at a site designated by the city public works director. No dirt will be allowed to be placed beside any fencing, walks or roads within the cemetery. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-38. - Plantings. (a)  All grading, landscape work, and improvements of any kind, and care of the cemetery, and all trees and shrubs moved and herbage of any kind shall be done by the city. Permanent planting of shrubs and flowers are to be made by the city. (b)  The whole cemetery is to be landscaped, and to keep it uniform it is necessary that all plantings be under the control of the city including the following additional care: removal of rubbish when necessary, raking and cutting grass, trimming of trees and shrubbery and other care that the city may deem necessary. The city herewith retains supervision of all lots in the city cemeteries and upon hearing before the city council, the city may prohibit, modify or cause to be removed, any structure, object or improvement which has been placed subsequent to the adoption of these rules and regulations, and which may be considered objectionable, unsightly or injurious to the lot upon which the same are located, adjoining lots, or the cemetery in general. (1)  The city may remove cut flowers, pot plants, and the containers and stands for the same, when the flowers or plants have become unsightly. For the purpose of this subsection "unsightly" is defined as applying to cut flowers or pot plants when the same have shattered blooms, wilted or dead leaves and blooms, bleached or discolored leaves and colored foliage, to the extent of one-fourth of the original total of the same. Nevertheless, the removal of cut flowers, pot plants, containers, and stands for the same such lots by the city, as hereinbefore set forth, is hereby authorized. (2)  The city may remove artificial flowers, silk flowers and foliage, artificial shrubs, pictures, stuffed animals, bric-a-brac, memorabilia, and similar items whenever the same become water-logged, scattered, discolored or damaged. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-39. - Memorials. (a)  No above ground slab (also known as ledger) will be permitted in this portion of Vienna City Cemetery named as the Northwest Section further designated as Blocks A - J. Bronze, granite or marble ledgers (pillows) will be allowed in Blocks A - J, if they are flush with ground level. The dimensions of the slab (ledger, pillow) shall be at least one foot by two feet but not to exceed one foot by three feet. (b)  Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, no above ground slab shall be permitted in the section of the Vienna City Cemetery, currently known as Northwest Cemetery (newest cemetery section), Blocks A - J. (1)  No coping, curbing, fencing, hedging, grave mounds, borders or enclosures of any kind shall be allowed around any lot in the Northwest Section Blocks A - J. (2)  No loose gravel shall be allowed on any lot the Northwest Section Blocks A - J. (3)  The city reserves the right to remove such gravel if so placed. (c)  All gravesites must be marked within 90 days of burial with markers made of bronze, granite or marble markers and all should be flush with the ground level. The dimensions of the marker (pillow) shall be at least one foot by two feet but not to exceed one foot by three feet. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-40. - Burial of veterans. (a)  All of the burial lots lying, being and situated in the Northwest Section Block number A - Vienna City Cemetery, are hereby set aside and reserved as a burial ground for honorably discharged deceased veterans of the Armed Forces of the United States, subject to all provisions, limitations and restrictions contained in this chapter, and such lots are hereby dedicated to such purposes. (b)  The full and complete title to and the right to the control of the lots set aside for burial of veterans is hereby retained in the city and the burial of deceased veterans therein shall be a privilege only, and no person shall acquire any vested right or title to any portion of such lots, excepting only the privilege of burying a deceased veteran therein subject to the restrictions and limitations provided in this chapter. (c)  When the family or next of kin of any honorably deceased veteran eligible for burial in that portion of the cemetery hereby set aside shall desire the privilege of burying such deceased veteran in such burial ground, the next of kin shall make application to the city administrator/clerk for the privilege of such burial. All such applications shall be in writing, shall give such information as may be required as to the age, birthplace, service in the Armed Forces of the United States, and the dates of such service of such deceased veterans, the kind and character of the discharge received by such deceased veteran upon the termination of his service and any other information called for or required. When required, the next of kin shall furnish proof of such service. If the city clerk is satisfied that such deceased veteran is entitled to such privilege of burial, he shall thereupon issue a permit for such burial and shall designate the portion of such burial ground in which such grave shall be located, which shall be entered on such permit. If the required application, the information called for and proof of service of such deceased veteran is not made and furnished, or if the city clerk is not satisfied that such deceased veteran is entitled to the privilege of such burial, no permit shall be issued. (d)  All graves located in the burial ground reserved for veterans shall be uniform and all (pillow) ledgers placed at the head of such grave shall be of bronze, marble or granite. No monuments, markers or memorials shall be erected upon or near any grave in such burial ground excepting only that a flat headstone of the type furnished by the United States of America for the graves of deceased veterans may be placed at the head of such grave. Neither the family, nor next of kin of any deceased veteran buried in such burial ground shall have the right to place any other type of slab over or erect any other type of monument or headstone at the head of or near any such grave. (e)  No burial site located in the veteran's memorial section shall have corner markers and/or any other monument/marker than the designated bronze, marble or granite markers placed flush with ground level. (f)  All improvements, plantings and beautification by private persons in the area of the cemetery reserved for burial of veterans must be approved by the city administrator/clerk. The city administrator/clerk may remove violating improvements and plantings. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-41. - Driving of trucks and/or equipment on lots.     All trucks and equipment, such as used by grave diggers, monument erectors, and other workers, driving on cemetery lots must have some support under their wheels before driving onto lots. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-42. - Workers' responsibility for cleanup.     Any person doing any type of work such as grave-digging, monument erecting, and similar activities, shall be responsible for the cleaning and removal of any waste, broken concrete, slabs, dirt, and other materials and disposal of such waste material in a proper place and not in the cemetery. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-43. - Care of inside lots. (a)  The neatness and proper care of the lots in the Northwest Cemetery shall be the responsibility of the contracted agent of the City of Vienna. The contracted agent of the City of Vienna will mow the grass on the lots, but will not weed the areas around any flower vases. (b)  The city public works department may prune, remove or transplant any tree, shrub, plant or flower growing upon any lot when, in its discretion, the maintenance may be necessary or shall add to the general appearance in the plan of a city-designated cemetery. (c)  The city shall have the right to install, maintain, operate, alter and repair pipe lines or gutters for sprinkler systems, drainage and landscape purposes, as well as the right to use land outside actual burial plots for public cemetery purposes other than for burial. (d)  No person shall cut, prune, remove or transplant any flower, shrub, tree or plant from any section without permission from the city administrator or authorized city employees. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-44. - Burial vaults. (a)  In order to maintain a high standard of care, a grave vault made of a permanent-type material such as natural stone, metal, concrete or fiberglass shall be placed in a grave so that the top of the vault will not be less than 12 inches below ground level at any point so as to eliminate unsightly and/or dead spots in grass sod. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bury a person in the City of Vienna Cemetery in a steel vault less than five feet from the top of the ground to the bottom of the grave or vault; and in a concrete/cement vault no person shall be buried less than four feet from the top of the ground to the bottom of the vault. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-45. - Maintenance. (a)  The City of Vienna Cemetery has been well maintained for many years. All grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind shall be performed only by the City of Vienna personnel or approved contractors of the City of Vienna. (b)  There is an historic significance within the Vienna City Cemetery, and in an effort to pertain and record this history, and in a continuous effort to maintain the cemetery, an opening/closing grave assessment fee will be administered and collected. (c)  Any person doing any type of work in the Vienna City Cemetery must notify City Hall. A signed permit will be issued by the city authorizing work. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-46. - Signs, notices or advertisements.     No sign, notice or advertisement of any kind will be permitted upon any part of the grounds of the cemeteries, except those erected by the City of Vienna in connection with the operation of the cemeteries. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-47. - Cemetery hours.     It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the City of Vienna Cemetery between the hours of sunset and sunrise. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-48. - Speed of vehicles.     No person shall drive a vehicle within the confines of the cemeteries at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Sec. 18-49. - Lot rates.     Be it ordained by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna and it is hereby ordained by the authority thereof, that the following rates shall be adopted as the cemetery lot rate for all of the City of Vienna Cemeteries to become effective, June 1, 2014. •  One grave lot: $500.00 •  Two graves lot: $1,000.00 •  Four graves lot: $2,000.00 (small family plot) •  Eight graves lot: $4,000.00 (large family plot) (Ord. of 6-9-14(2)) 
Secs. 18-50—18-75. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 22-31. - Definition.     As used in this article, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. (Code 1980, § 3-3-1) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-32. - Unlawful acts during emergencies.     It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: (1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. (2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city, or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. (3)  To wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. (Code 1980, § 3-3-4) 
Secs. 22-33—22-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY AUTHORITY OF MAYOR[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Mayor and council, § 2-31 et seq. 
Sec. 22-56. - Conditions authorizing declaration of emergency.     The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exist: (1)  There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. (2)  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. (3)  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. (4)  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. (Code 1980, § 3-3-3) 
Sec. 22-57. - Powers after declaration.     After declaration of an emergency under section 22-56, the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: (1)  To use employees of the city to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of its citizenry. (2)  To close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. (3)  To impose emergency curfew regulations. (4)  To close business establishments within the affected area. (5)  To close any or all city-owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public. (6)  To do all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. (Code 1980, § 3-3-3) 
Sec. 22-58. - Effective period of emergency powers. (a)  No emergency power as set forth in section 22-57 may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth in such section may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. (b)  No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the mayor and city council. (Code 1980, § 3-3-3) 
Sec. 22-59. - Specified area.     The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
Secs. 22-60—22-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 22-81. - Creation; membership.     An emergency management agency is hereby created and shall include the following members: (1)  Mayor and director of emergency management as appointed. (2)  Police chief. (3)  Fire chief. (4)  City health officer. (5)  American Red Cross representative. (6)  Others, including representatives of business, labor and patriotic organizations as appointed by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 22-82. - Powers and duties.     It shall be the duty of the emergency management agency to: (1)  Develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. (2)  Prepare and recommend for consideration by the mayor and council ordinances necessary to implement the emergency management plan. (3)  Consider and recommend to the mayor and city council for approval mutual aid plans and agreements. 
Sec. 22-83. - Director.     There is hereby created the office of emergency management director. Such officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the following powers and duties: (1)  Represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management. (2)  Require and direct cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans. (3)  During periods of emergency, direct the services of any city officers or employees. (4)  During periods of emergency, obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking, needed for the protection of life and property of people and bind the city for the value thereof and, if required, to immediately requisition same. (Code 1980, § 3-3-2(a)) 
Sec. 22-84. - Corps—Composition.     Officers and employees of the city, with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements on operation of law to be charged with duties necessary for the protection of life and property in the city during such an emergency shall constitute the emergency management corps. 
Sec. 22-85. - Same—Divisions.     The functions and duties of the emergency management corps shall be distributed in the divisions as listed below. Each division shall be under the direction of a chief and deputy chief appointed by the emergency management agency. The chiefs of divisions will include public officials such as sheriff, chiefs of police and fire departments, heads of agencies dealing with transportation, communications and other sundry services, as well as private businessmen who through their profession, knowledge and experience are particularly qualified to head divisions requiring specialized knowledge and experience. The divisions are established as follows: (1)  Law enforcement division. (2)  Fire services division. (3)  Transportation division. (4)  Medical and health division. (5)  Communications division. (6)  Welfare division. (7)  Information and education division. 
Sec. 22-86. - Volunteers.     All persons other than officers and employees of the city volunteering in service pursuant to the defense under this article shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
Chapter 26 - COURT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 26-1. - Office of municipal court judge established.     It is ordained by the mayor and council to establish the official title and position of judge of the municipal court for the city. The judge of the municipal court shall be elected by majority vote of the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 2-3-1(a)) 
Sec. 26-2. - Removal of municipal judge.     Removal of the municipal judge shall be by majority vote of the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 2-3-1(b)) 
Sec. 26-3. - Compensation of municipal judge.     The salary of the municipal judge shall be as provided by the mayor and council from time to time. (Code 1980, § 2-3-1(c)) 
Sec. 26-4. - Hours of operation.     The municipal judge of the court is hereby authorized to impose a technology fee to each citation or accusation brought before said court in which a bond forfeiture, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere, or a guilty finding after trial by the municipal court. The technology fee shall be in an amount not to exceed $35.00 per citation and/or accusation. Said technology fee may be amended by the municipal judge of the court when the third party fees are increased. (Ord. of 4-14-14(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 26-5. - Failure to appear warrant costs.     The municipal judge of the court is hereby authorized to impose the cost of service to each failure to appear warrant issued by said court upon failure of the defendant to appear as summoned to an accusation or by warrant, in an amount not to exceed $100.00 per failure to appear warrant issued and served. Said failure to appear warrant cost may be amended by the municipal judge of the court as deemed necessary and allowed by Charter of the City of Vienna. (Ord. of 4-14-14(1), § 1) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, § 6-4; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50. State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-1. - Adoption of state rules, regulations.     The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board pertaining to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code contained in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq., are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations and provisions that shall govern the conduct of municipal general and special elections in the city. (Code 1980, ch. 2-2) 
Sec. 30-2. - Filing of notices of candidacy.     Notices of candidacy shall be filed by candidates for offices of the mayor and council no sooner than 32 days prior to the election in the case of a general election and no sooner than 25 days prior to the election in the case of a special election. The deadline for filing the foregoing notices of candidacy shall be 22 days prior to the election in the case of a general election and 15 days prior to the election in the case of a special election. Notices of candidacy shall be filed in the office of the municipal election superintendent during normal business hours. (Code 1980, § 2-2-3; Ord. of 3-12-90, § 1) State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy for office, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. 
Sec. 30-3. - Polling places.     The city shall consist of one voting district, with the polling place being located at the city hall. (Code 1980, § 2-2-6) 
Sec. 30-4. - Expenses.     Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and from time to time when required. 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 34-31. - Definition.     A nuisance is anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. (Code 1980, § 9-2-1) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 34-32. - Enumeration of nuisances. (a)  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. (b)  The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: (1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. (2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. (3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. (4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. (5)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number 3 on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. (6)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. (7)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. (8)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. (9)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. (10)  Depositing trash, garbage, refuse on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish and trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. (11)  Unoccupied buildings and vacant structures. Unoccupied buildings or vacant structures that are not properly maintained and cleaned or which are not in conformity with the requirements of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Vienna in sections 14-10, 14-11 and 14-12. (12)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery, etc. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. (13)  Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. (14)  Open or outdoor storage. The open or outdoor storage of appliances, building materials or debris, equipment, garbage, glass, material, merchandise, rubbish, trash or similar items shall not be permitted, maintained or stored on any premises. Exceptions to these restrictions are: a.  Property where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning resolution; b.  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three linear feet for the personal use of the owner or occupant and which is stored in a side or rear yard; and c.  Rubbish, garbage, trash or other similar items placed outside in proper and acceptable containers for collection by an authorized waste hauler not more than 24 hours prior to the designated collection date for that property. (15)  Standing or surface waters. Any standing water or surface water the owner or other occupant of the premises allows to remain thereon for such time as to create conditions conducive to the breeding or attraction of rodents, flies, fleas, ticks, mosquitos, or any other disease-carrying insects. (Code 1980, § 9-2-1; Ord. of 4-25-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-33. - Prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. (Code 1980, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 34-34. - Issuance of summons for abatement.     Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other person responsible therefor refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the same, the chief of police, or the officer having responsibility for the enforcement of same, may issue a summons and cause the same to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts thereof claimed to be violated thereby, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified therein, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. (Code 1980, § 9-2-2) 
Sec. 34-35. - Order for abatement. (a)  If the municipal judge at the hearing required by section 34-34 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the city is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other person responsible therefor to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other person responsible therefor shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition, and the expense thereof shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. (b)  Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes. (Code 1980, § 9-2-2) State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 34-36. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. (a)  Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of this city is a nuisance. (b)  The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of this city upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owner, owners, and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage, shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or otherwise by removing it to a location without the corporate limits. 
Sec. 34-37. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger.     Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 34-34 and 34-35. 
Sec. 34-38. - Service on nonresidents and others.     Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 34-34 and 34-35 and the owner of the property or other person responsible therefor resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 34-35 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
Sec. 34-39. - Other powers preserved.     Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
Secs. 34-40—34-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEGETATION 
Sec. 34-61. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. (a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this division. (b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. (c)  The provisions of this division shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city. 
Sec. 34-62. - Height permitted.     It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground. 
Sec. 34-63. - Notice to abate. (a)  For a violation of this division, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. (b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
Sec. 34-64. - Abatement by city; notice of abatement. (a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 34-63, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property, and the contractor is authorized to enter same, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the city. The city shall inspect the work, and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the city treasurer for payment. (b)  The city treasurer shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. (c)  If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the city treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. (d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this division, that the notice required of section 34-63 was given, that the work was performed and the cost thereof paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, signed by the municipal judge and shall be executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions are executed. (e)  If the owner of the property is unknown, or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply; but in lieu thereof a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern," shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved, a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
Sec. 34-65. - Remedies.     The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this division. Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance; and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 34-66. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city.     Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the city shall obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two inches but not in excess of four inches in diameter; and the mayor and city council shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder, such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. 
Secs. 34-67—34-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within the motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 
Sec. 34-101. - Loud; unnecessary; unusual.     It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which unreasonably or unnecessarily either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: (1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. (2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. (3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. (Code 1980, § 9-1-3(a)) 
Sec. 34-102. - Enumeration.     The following acts, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article; but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: (1)  Horns; signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. (2)  Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. (3)  Loudspeakers; amplifiers; other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instruments, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the city clerk or the mayor and council. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. (4)  Yelling; shouting; hooting; whistling; singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. (5)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. (6)  Steam whistle. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities. (7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. (8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. (9)  Loading; unloading; opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. (10)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city building official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed by the mayor and council for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the mayor and council determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the mayor and council may grant permission for such work to be done from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. (11)  Schools, courts; churches; hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in session or adjacent to any hospital, and that unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or that disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions. (12)  Hawkers; peddlers; vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors that disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. (13)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise. (14)  Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. (15)  Piledrivers, hammers; other such appliances. The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the mayor and council. (16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. (17)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes; the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance. (Code 1980, § 9-1-3(b)) 
Secs. 34-103—34-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 28, 2014(1), amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 34-136—34-199 was entitled "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control" and derived from Code 1980, §§ 6-5-2—6-5-4, 6-5-6—6-5-8. Cross reference— Buildings and building construction, ch. 14. 
Sec. 34-136. - Title.     This article will be known as the "City of Vienna Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-137. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: (1)  Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. (2)  Board: The board of natural resources. (3)  Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. (4)  Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. (5)  Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). (6)  CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. (7)  Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. (8)  Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). (9)  Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. (10)  Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. (11)  District: The Dooly County Soil and Water Conservation District. (12)  Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. (13)  Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. (14)  Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. (15)  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 34-139(c) of this article. (16)  Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. (17)  Final stabilization: All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. (18)  Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. (19)  Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. (20)  Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. (21)  Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 34-138(5). (22)  Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple, separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. (23)  Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). (24)  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. (25)  Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. (26)  Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. (27)  NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. (28)  NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. (29)  Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. (30)  Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. (31)  Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. (32)  Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. (33)  Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. (34)  Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. (35)  Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual), published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. (36)  Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. (37)  Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. (38)  Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. (39)  Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Dooly County Soil and Water Conservation District. (40)  Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. (41)  State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or re-issued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). (42)  State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. (43)  Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. (44)  Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. (45)  Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. (46)  Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. (47)  Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-138. - Exemptions.     This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; (2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; (3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; (5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; (6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 34-139(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; (7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; (8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; (9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; (10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and (11)  Any public water system reservoir. (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-139. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. (a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. (b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. (1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) below of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this section the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). (2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. (3)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. (4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. (5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). (c)  Additional requirements. The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: (1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; (2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; (3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; (4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; (5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; (7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; (10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; (11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; (12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; (14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; (15)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided that, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream: cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and (16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream: cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. (d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. (e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-140. - Application/permit process. (a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, the ordinance from which this article derives, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. (b)  Application requirements. (1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Vienna, Georgia without first obtaining a permit from the City of Vienna to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD, as applicable. (2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city administrator or his/her designee and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 34-139(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by up to six copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. Additional copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans may also be submitted directly to EPD, as specified by the City of Vienna. (3)  The City of Vienna assesses local permitting fees and also state-mandated fees. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. Except as otherwise provided for herein, fees for an application for a permit on a per-acre of land disturbed basis, as required by this article, shall be as established by the City of Vienna from time to time by resolution of the city council. In addition to the local permitting fees, state-mandated fees shall also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), and regulations adopted thereunder by EPD, in the amount of $80.00 per disturbed acre, to be divided as follows: $40.00 per acre to Vienna and $40.00 per acre to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (if the city is a designated local issuing authority) or $80.00 per acre to the Georgia Environmental Protection Agency (if the city is not a designated local issuing authority). In the case of a subdivision or other larger common plan of development or sale, "per disturbed acre" includes all acreage to be disturbed in the entire development. Fees for the county shall be submitted to the county including primary and secondary permittees. Fees for the state shall be submitted to the state on EPD forms available at http://www.gaepd.org. However, any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division. (4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the City of Vienna shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the City of Vienna. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 34-139(c)(15) and (16) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the City of Vienna and the district enter into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. (5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this Code section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. (6)  The City of Vienna shall require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. The city administrator may release a portion of the letter of credit, for the land-disturbing amount, after final stabilization is complete and all permanent vegetation and stabilization measures are in place. If the permit holder believes they are not in violation of this article such that the surety should not be drawn against, the permit holder may appeal any notice to comply to the City of Vienna. Appeal shall be made by filing a written notice of appeal within five days of any notice to comply to with the city administrator stating the basis for the appeal. The city council shall consider the appeal at the next scheduled public meeting. Except in emergency situations, the surety shall not be drawn against until the appeal is considered. The decision of the city council shall be final. (c)  Plan requirements. (1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 34-139(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the inter-relationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (2)  Data required for site plans shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. (d)  Permits. (1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the City of Vienna of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. (2)  No permit shall be issued by the City of Vienna unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the city administrator or his/her designee has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 34-139(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Vienna are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. (4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. (5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the City of Vienna, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. (6)  The City of Vienna may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-141. - Inspection and enforcement. (a)  The City of Vienna is responsible for periodically inspecting all sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the City of Vienna shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. (b)  The City of Vienna must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. (c)  The City of Vienna shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. (d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (e)  The district or the commission, or both, shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. (f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-142. - Penalties and incentives. (a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. (b)  Stop-work orders. (1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the City of Vienna shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the City of Vienna shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the City of Vienna shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; (2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the City of Vienna shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and (3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. (4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the City of Vienna or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the city or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. (c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 34-140(b)(6). The City of Vienna may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which a violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-143. - Education and certification. (a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. (c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. (d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-144. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. (a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna within 30 days after receipt by the city administrator of written notice of appeal. (b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Dooly County, Georgia. (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-145. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectively. The ordinance codified in this article shall become effective on the 28th day of July, 2014. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. of 7-28-14(1)) 
Secs. 34-146—34-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 
Sec. 34-221. - Short title and purpose. (a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance". (b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. (Ord. of 10-11-99, § 1) 
Sec. 34-222. - Definitions.     When used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section:     Hazardous waste or material. Any waste or material which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: (1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or (2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.     Sanitary landfill. A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescent wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.     Wellhead. The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves, and other attachments. (Ord. of 10-11-99, § 2) 
Sec. 34-223. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone.     There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. (Ord. of 10-11-99, § 3) 
Sec. 34-224. - Permitted uses.     The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: (1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot, any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone, shall not be less than one acre; and (2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. (Ord. of 10-11-99, § 4) 
Sec. 34-225. - Prohibited uses.     The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 34-224 of this article: (1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; (2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; (3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways, and walks serving buildings permitted under section 34-224 of this article; (4)  Sanitary landfills; (5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; (6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; (7)  Underground storage tanks; (8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. (Ord. of 10-11-99, § 5) 
Sec. 34-226. - Administration.     The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement, and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the City of Vienna, as the same is presently enacted or may, from time to time, be amended. (Ord. of 10-11-99, § 6) 
Secs. 34-227—34-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 34-251. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Official tree species list means the official list of trees authorized for planting, class, and distances of each specie to curbs or curbings and sidewalks as maintained by the city clerk as approved by the mayor and city council.     Park trees means those trees in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.     Street trees means those trees lying between the property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, drives, or ways within the city. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-252. - Specifications for tree plantings. (a)  Species. No species of street tree shall be planted unless specifically listed on the official species tree list. (b)  Spacing. Spacing of street and park trees shall be in accordance with the tree species size and class listed on the official tree species list and no trees may be planted closer together than specified on the official tree species except in special plantings designed or approved by the tree commission of the city. (c)  Distance from curbs, sidewalks. The distance trees may be planted from curbs, curbings, and sidewalks shall be in accordance with the distance specified on the official tree species list. No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees on the official tree species list, may be planted closer than 35 feet from any curbs, curblines or sidewalks. No street trees shall be planted closer than ten feet from any fireplug or fire hydrant. (d)  Distance from utility installations. No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees on the official tree species list, may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, gas line, transmission line or other utility line and/or communication line. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-253. - City authority to plant, maintain, and remove trees. (a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety, to preserve public properties, or to enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public grounds. The city tree commission, subject to obtaining the express written approval of the mayor and city council, may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public utilities and improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other definable pest. (b)  No tree within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, except any tree which is in immediate threat to the safety and welfare of the citizens of Vienna, due to damage to the tree by storm, lightning, or other calamity, shall be removed and/or cut down without the approval of the mayor and city council. The tree commission of the city may recommend removal of any such tree to the mayor and city council. The final authority concerning the removal of such tree is vested solely in the mayor and city council. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-254. - Tree topping requiring authorization.     It shall be unlawful as a "normal practice" for any person, company, entity or city department to "top" any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter with the crown of the tree to such a degree as to remove the normal and natural canopy of the tree and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by lightning, storms, or other causes, or certain trees located under utility wires or other public obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the city tree commission. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-255. - Pruning; corner clearance; clear space along public way.     The owner of land whereon any tree overhangs any street or public right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches of said tree to an extent that such branches shall not obstruct the view any street and/or public right-of-way intersections and further to the extent that no overhang shall be allowed which would obstruct a clear space of eight feet above the surface of any street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way. The owner of land shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs on such land which constitutes a menace to the public health and safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub within the city when such tree or shrub obstructs or interferes with the lighting from a street light or lights along any street or public right-of-way and/or such tree or shrub obstructs or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign, including, but not limited to street name signs. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-256. - Tree removal and pruning on private property.     The city shall have the right to remove or cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees growing on private property within the city when such dead or diseased tree or trees constitute a threat or hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the public and/or other property. The city shall have the right to remove or cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees growing on private property within the city when such dead or diseased tree or trees harbor insects, disease, or other identifiable pests which constitute a threat to the life of other trees within the city based on published botanical criteria, such as publications of the University of Georgia Extension Service. The city tree commission shall notify the owner or owners of the dead or diseased tree or trees as described in this section in writing by either hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested. The owner or owners of such identified tree or trees identified in this section shall remove or cause the same to be removed at the owner or owners expense within 60 days of the date of receipt of the written notice from the city tree commission. In the event that the owner or owners fail to remove such tree or trees within the prescribed time, the city shall have the authority to remove the same and charge the cost of such removal to the owner or owners of the lands on which such tree or trees were located and/or place a lien against such lands as provided by law for collection of ad valorem taxes. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-257. - Removal of stumps.     All stumps of street and park trees which have been removed shall be removed in such manner and to such extent that topmost remaining portion of said stumps shall be below the surface level of the immediately surrounding land. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-258. - Interference with the city or city tree commission prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the city, the city tree commission, and any of their members, employees or agents while such are within the scope of their authority and within the corporate limits of the city in the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, identifying, or removal of any street trees and park trees, as well as any trees on private lands which are within and authorized by this article. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-259. - Penalty.     Any person who shall violate section 34-258 of this article may, according to the nature of the offense, be charged with such offense as defined and proscribed in O.C.G.A. title 16. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Secs. 34-260—34-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE COMMISSION 
Sec. 34-280. - Created; membership. (a)  There is hereby created and established a city tree commission for the City of Vienna which shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the City of Vienna or serve on the Keep Vienna Beautiful Commission, over the age of 18 years, and not incarcerated, on probation, or on parole for a conviction of or guilty plea to any felony as such are defined by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and said commission shall be "Vienna Tree Commission". (b)  The members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the mayor and city council at the organizational meeting of the mayor and city council each calendar year. The term of a member shall be three years. For the initial appointment to the first Vienna Tree Commission, one member shall be appointed for a one-year term, two members shall be appointed for a two-year term, and two members shall be appointed for a three-year term. (c)  If a vacancy on the commission shall occur during the term of any member, the successor shall be appointed by a majority vote of the mayor and city council for the unexpired portion of the term. Vacancy shall be deemed to have occurred upon the death, incapacity, or resignation of a member, the member moving residence outside the corporate limits of the City of Vienna, or removal of the member for cause by the Vienna Tree Commission and/or the mayor and city council. (d)  The members of the Vienna Tree Commission shall serve without compensation. However, the mayor and city council may at its discretion provide for reimbursement to members of actual expenses and costs incurred by a member or members. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-281. - Organization; records; rules of procedure. (a)  The duly appointed members of the Vienna Tree Commission shall choose their own officers at the first meeting each calendar year and at the initial meeting of the first Vienna Tree Commission organizational meeting. (b)  The duly appointed members of the Vienna Tree Commission shall set its meeting times and locations and promulgate its rules of procedure and its policies, procedures and regulations, subject only to the requirements of: (1) being in compliance with all due process requirements; and (2) not being in violation of and/or conflict with federal law, laws of the State of Georgia, and the Charter and Code of Ordinances of the City Vienna. (c)  A majority of the members of the Vienna Tree Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Meetings of the commission shall be in compliance with the Georgia "Open Meetings" Law. (d)  The Vienna Tree Commission shall take, record, and maintain minutes of its meetings in a book designated for such purposes. Records of the commission shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia "Open Records" Law. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-282. - Responsibilities; duties.     The Vienna Tree Commission shall study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually and administer a written plan of action for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, and disposition of trees in the public parks, within all public rights-of-way, and in other public owned areas. The plan and any amendments to the plan shall be presented annually to the mayor and city council. Upon the approval of the plan by the mayor and city council, the plan shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the City of Vienna. The Vienna Tree Commission, at the request of the mayor and city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend to the mayor and council upon any special matter or questions which is within the scope of the duties of the commission. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-283. - Review by the mayor and city council.     The mayor and city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, decisions of the Vienna Tree Commission upon its own motion or upon an appeal by an affected party. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 34-284. - Appeals. (a)  Any person affected by the conduct, acts, findings or decisions of the Vienna Tree Commission may appeal such to the mayor and city council. (b)  All appeals from the Vienna Tree Commission to the mayor and city council shall be filed with the Clerk of the City of Vienna at city hall and a copy served upon the presiding officer of the Vienna Tree Commission. All appeals shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the conduct, acts, findings, or decisions which are being appealed. All appeals shall be in writing and shall set forth: (1) the specific conduct, acts, findings or decisions which is being appealed; (2) the specific type of relief sought; (3) a short statement of the facts involved; and (4) copies of all documents, maps, plats, and/or photographs which the appealing party desires the mayor and city council to review. (c)  The city clerk will notify in writing the appealing party and the Vienna Tree Commission as to the time, date and location of any hearing on the appeal from the Vienna Tree Commission to the mayor and city council. Said hearing will be held within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal by the city clerk. (Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Secs. 34-285—34-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REAL PROPERTY; BLIGHTED CONDITION 
Sec. 34-300. - Definitions.     The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them:     Blighted as applied to a piece of property, means that property is being maintained in a blighted condition.     Millage rate means only the general millage rate for the city maintenance and operations.     Public officer means the building inspector, code enforcement director, city clerk, police officer, or any other city official who is authorized by law and this Code to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, or any agent, of such officer or officers, or any other employee, officer or officers designated by the city clerk for purposes of this article. (Ord. of 4-13-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-301. - Blighted condition designation.     In order for the property in question to be subject to official identification as blighted and subject to increased taxation, the property must be determined to be: (1)  Unfit for human habitation or unfit for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or (2)  Vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (3)  Constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; and (4)  Not a dwelling house, which is being used as the primary residence of one or more persons. (Ord. of 4-13-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-302. - Procedure for identification of property as blighted.     The procedure for official identification of real property as blighted includes: (1)  A request from a public officer or at least five residents of the City of Vienna charging that any building, structure or property meets criteria described in section 34-301. (2)  An investigation or inspection by the public officer and determination that the property in question meets the criteria described in section 34-301. (3)  A public officer's issuance of a complaint in rem against the property. The complaint shall state which condition(s) under section 34-301 exist on the property and what steps should be taken to remediate the property. (4)  A public officer's causing a summons and a copy of the complaint to be mailed via certified to the owner of the property. The latter is anyone revealed by a certification of the title to real property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Municipal Court of The City of Vienna ('hereinafter "municipal court") at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. (5)  If after such notice and hearing, the municipal court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question meets the criteria in section 34-301 above, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause its written findings to be served upon the interest parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order. (6)  No property shall be designated as blighted unless the Municipal Court of Vienna enters an order that finds the property in question meets the criteria described in subsections 34-301(1), (2) or (3). This order constitutes official identification of real property as maintained in a blighted condition. (7)  If the municipal court finds that the property is blighted, it shall, in the same order, list what must be done to remove the blighted conditions designation, and give the owner a deadline in which to finish the work. (Ord. of 4-13-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-303. - Imposition of increased tax rate.     Property, which has been officially designated as blighted, shall be subject to an increase rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to a triple (three times) the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of the issuance of the subsequent tax bills, not to exceed maximum rates as provided by general law. The increased rate continues to be applied to all subsequent tax bills until the property's designation as maintained in a blighted condition is removed as provided in this section. This increased rate of taxation and the official identification of the property as blighted remain with the property if transferred to another owner. (Ord. of 4-13-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-304. - Revenue segregated.     Revenue collected from increases in rate of ad valorem taxation shall be segregated and applied to community redevelopment purposes. (Ord. of 4-13-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-305. - Remediation.     The property in question may be rehabilitated at any time through remedial actions of redevelopment that conforms with the municipal court order setting forth what must be done to remove the identification of property as maintained in a blighted condition. Owner may request removal of the property's designation as blighted from the city clerk or from the municipal court upon proper proof, including an inspection by a public officer, that the property has been remediated and now conforms with the court order listing what must be done to remove the identification of the property as blighted. The city clerk shall be notified in writing ten days before any hearing in the municipal court. (Ord. of 4-13-09, § 1) 
Sec. 34-306. - Remediation property tax rate. Property  which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed as provided in this article will become eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation equivalent to one-half percent of the normal millage rate applied to the property, applied at the time of issuance of the subsequent tax bill, as provided by general law. This decreased rate is applied to tax bills for three years. (Ord. of 4-13-09, § 1) 
Secs. 34-307—34-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 20, 2010 set out the above provisions designated as art. VII, §§ 34-501—34-505. Due to art. VII already in existence, at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been added as art. III, §§ 34-401—34-405, as set out herein. 
Sec. 34-401. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape.     Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining groundcover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the incorporated area of the City of Vienna may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: (1)  Commercial agricultural operations raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to chickens, hens, ratitae, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; (2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; (3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; (4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; (5)  Watering personal food gardens; (6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; (7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; (8)  Hand-watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; (9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator or property if such well or surface water is on said property; (10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale or installation; (11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; (12)  Installation, maintenance or calibration of irrigation systems; or (13)  Hydroseeding. (Ord. of 12-20-10) 
Sec. 34-402. - Enforcement. (a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor watering contained in this article. (b)  The city police chief shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city administrator shall also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. (c)  Any violation of this article shall be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the Municipal Court of the City of Vienna or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. (Ord. of 12-20-10) 
Sec. 34-403. - Repealer.     All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. (Ord. of 12-20-10) 
Sec. 34-404. - Severability.     The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this article are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of the City of Vienna. (Ord. of 12-20-10) 
Sec. 34-405. - Effective date.     This article shall go into effect on January 1, 2011. (Ord. of 12-20-10) 
Secs. 34-406—34-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 25, 2014(1), set out provisions intended for use as §§ 34-150—34-157. For purposes of clarity and to preserve the numbering style of this Code, with the concurrence of the city and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. IX, §§ 34-431—34-438. 
Sec. 34-431. - General provisions. (a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: (1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system by any person; (2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system; (3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system; and (4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. (b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the City of Vienna, Georgia. (c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (e)  Responsibility for administration. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. of 7-25-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-432. - Definitions.     "Accidental discharge" means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.     "Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.     "Construction activity" means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.     "Illegal connection" means either of the following: (1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or (2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.     "Illicit discharge" means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 34-433 of this article.     "Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).     "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit" means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b), that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.     "City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system" means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, City of Vienna streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: (1)  Owned or maintained by the City of Vienna, Georgia; (2)  Not a combined sewer; and (3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.     "Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.     "Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     "Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.     "Pollution" means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent, and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.     "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.     "State waters" means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person.     "Stormwater runoff" or "stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.     "Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release, or the velocity of flow. (Ord. of 7-25-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-433. - Prohibitions. (a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: (1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; (2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety; (3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system. (b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system is prohibited. (1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. (3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee. (4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee. (Ord. of 7-25-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-434. - Industrial or construction activity discharges.     Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee prior to allowing discharges to the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system. (Ord. of 7-25-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-435. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities.     The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. (1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City of Vienna, Georgia. (2)  The owner or operator shall allow the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. (3)  The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. (4)  The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. (5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. (6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee access to a facility is a violation of this article. (7)  If the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. of 7-25-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-436. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. (a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the City of Vienna, Georgia separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. (b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee within three business of the discharge by phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. (c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. (d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. (Ord. of 7-25-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-437. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. (a)  Violations. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. (2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. (b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may order compliance by written notice of violation. (1)  The notice of violation shall contain: a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. (2)  Such notice may require without limitation: a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting; b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; c.  That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist; d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. (c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia shall be final. (d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia upholding the decision of the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, or his/her designee, then the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee or other representatives of the City of Vienna, Georgia may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. (1)  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of such notice. If the property owner objects to the decision by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee concerning said written protest within 30 days from such decision by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, the property owner may file a written appeal to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. (2)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City of Vienna, Georgia by reason of such violation. (f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall deem appropriate, after the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. (g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee or the City of Vienna, Georgia Police Department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare and environment, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. (i)  Remedies not exclusive. (1)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, Georgia may seek cumulative remedies. (2)  The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, Georgia may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord. of 7-25-14(1)) 
Sec. 34-438. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectively. The ordinance codified in this article shall become effective on the 28th day of July, 2014. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. of 7-25-14(1)) 
Secs. 34-439—34-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 
Sec. 34-461. - Title.     This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Wetlands Protection Ordinance." (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Sec. 34-462. - Purpose and intent.     Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the well-being of communities in the State of Georgia. Nationally, a considerable number of wetlands have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other activities. Without additional regulation, piecemeal or cumulative losses of wetlands will continue to occur over time. Therefore, it is in the interest of public safety and general welfare to avoid damage or destruction to wetlands. The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection by adopting a generalized wetlands map; provide for the withholding of land use and building permits in areas designated as wetlands until a jurisdictional wetland determination is completed; and establish permitted and prohibited land uses within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map. (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Sec. 34-463. - Definitions.     Generalized wetlands map: A map of wetlands provided in the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map showing wetlands within the City of Vienna.     Jurisdictional wetland: An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers.     Jurisdictional wetland determination: A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U. S. C. 1344, as amended.     Regulated activity: Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U. S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.     Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. Types of Wetlands Source: Tiner and Burke, 1995, http://www.mde.state.md.us/wetlands/wwr/Figure2w.htm (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Sec. 34-464. - Adoption of generalized wetlands map by reference.     The generalized wetlands map, as defined by this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference, and hereby made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Sec. 34-465. - Applicability.     This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Vienna that are shown on the generalized wetlands map, as defined by this article, as wetlands. (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Sec. 34-466. - Permit required.     No land use permit or building permit shall be issued for a land use, building, structure, or manufactured home, nor shall any regulated activity as defined by this article commence, unless the land use, building, structure, manufactured home or regulated activity conforms to the requirements of this article. Prior to a land use permit of building permit being issued, the building inspector shall require a site plan or subdivision plat insufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Sec. 34-467. - Jurisdictional wetland determination required.     If an area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetland as shown on the generalized wetlands map, as determined by the zoning officer, no local land use permit or building permit on said wetland shall be issued until a jurisdictional wetland determination has been completed and either of the following occur: (1)  The U. S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that there are jurisdictional wetlands present on the proposed development site, a Section 404 permit is required, and either a Section 404 Permit or a letter of permission is issued by the Corps for the proposed development; or, (2)  The U. S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that jurisdictional wetlands are not present on the proposed development site, and no Section 404 permit or letter of permission is required. (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Sec. 34-468. - Permitted uses.     The following uses shall be allowed as of right within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. (1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. (2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. (3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specific in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. (4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. (5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. (6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Sec. 34-469. - Prohibited uses.     The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: (1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. (2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. (Ord. of 2-8-16(2)) 
Secs. 34-470—34-479. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 
Sec. 34-480. - Title.     This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance." (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-481. - Purpose and intent.     Groundwater is among the nation's most important natural resources. It provides drinking water to urban and rural communities, supports irrigation and industry, sustains the flow of streams and rivers, and maintains riparian and wetland ecosystems. In many areas of the nation, the future sustainability of groundwater resources is at risk from overuse and contamination. Because groundwater systems typically respond slowly to human actions, a long-term perspective is needed to manage this valuable resource. This article is intended to implement rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division known as the "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria" as they specifically relate to groundwater recharge areas (Rule 391-3-16-.02). It is essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the public that the quality of subsurface public drinking water be maintained. Groundwater resources exist in underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface that are capable of providing water for a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface, known as groundwater recharge areas. Certain land use activities, such as septic tanks, underground tanks, and chemical spills, pose a significant threat to the quality of groundwater supplies. Therefore, it is necessary to manage land uses within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats and development impacts are minimized. To this end, this article establishes minimum lot sizes to provide for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems. Recharge of Groundwater from Surface Water During Normal and Drought Conditions (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-482. - Definitions.     Acre-foot: The volume (as of irrigation water) that would cover one acre to a depth of one foot.     Aquifer: Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or providing water for a well.     DRASTIC: The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility).     Hydrologic Atlas 18: A map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1989, which identifies the most significant groundwater recharge areas of Georgia as spotted areas labeled as "areas of thick soils."     Hydrologic Atlas 20: A multi-colored map of Georgia at a scale of 1:500,000, prepared by the Georgia DNR using the DRASTIC methodology and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1992, which shows areas of high, average (or medium), and low susceptibility of groundwater to pollution in Georgia. This map is also commonly known as the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia.     Pollution susceptibility: The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, infections and other human activities in the recharge area. Each significant recharge area shown on Hydrologic Atlas 18 is classified on Hydrologic Atlas 20 as high, medium, or low, and these classifications are relevant in this article.     Recharge area: Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer.     Significant recharge areas: Those areas mapped by the Georgia DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within the jurisdiction of the City of Vienna. Each significant recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on Hydrologic Atlas 20. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-483. - Adoption of Hydrologic Atlas 18 by reference.     "Hydrologic Atlas 18", as defined by this ordinance is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-484. - Adoption of Hydrologic Atlas 20 by reference.     "Hydrologic Atlas 20", as defined by this ordinance is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-485. - Applicability.     This article shall apply to all lands within the City of Vienna that are mapped as significant recharge areas as defined by this article. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-486. - Permit required.     No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for a building structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the land use or building conforms to the requirements of this article. Prior to land use permit or building permit being issued, the building inspector shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-487. - County health department approval of permit required.     No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for a building, structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the local health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter DHR Manual) and this article. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-488. - Minimum lot size.     Within an area governed by this article, new homes or land uses served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum lot sizes as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in DHR MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in Sections A-F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the local health department: (1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. (2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area. (3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area.     Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this section. Within an area governed by this article, no subdivision plat shall be recorded until and unless said plat has been reviewed and approved by the zoning officer as being in compliance with the minimum lot sizes established by this section. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-489. - Mobile home parks.     Within an area governed by this article, new mobile home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum areas in square feet as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in Sections A-F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the local health department. (1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. (2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area. (3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area.     Within an area governed by this article, no site plan for a mobile home park or manufactured home park shall be considered valid until and unless said site plan has been reviewed and approved by the zoning officer as being in compliance with the minimum space sizes established by this section. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-490. - Agricultural waste impoundment sites.     New agricultural waste impoundment sites in a significant recharge area, as specified below, shall contain a liner consisting of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service: (1)  Any agricultural waste impoundment site located in a high pollution susceptibility area; (2)  Any agricultural waste impoundment site within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area which exceeds 15 acre-feet; or (3)  Any agricultural waste impoundment site within a low pollution susceptibility area that exceeds 50 acre-feet. 
Sec. 34-491. - Above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks.     Within an area governed by this article, new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks having a minimum volume of 660 gallons shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-492. - Hazardous materials handling facilities.     With an area governed by this article, new facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local or applicable state fire code requirements. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Sec. 34-493. - Stormwater infiltration basins.     Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in significant recharge areas having high pollution susceptibility. TABLE MT-1 NEW HOMES MINIMUM LOT SIZES, MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS AND MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SEWAGE FLOW FOR THE TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM Type of Water Supply System Non-Public*(Individual) Public Minimum Lot Size 65,340 sq. feet 21,780 sq. feet Minimum Lot Width 150 feet 100 feet Maximum Sewage Flow 600 gpad** 1,200 gpad  * In this context, Non-Public means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a public water supply system. ** Gpad = gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. TABLE MT-2 MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS MINIMUM LOT SIZES, MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS AND MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SEWAGE FLOW FOR THE TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM Type of Water Supply System Non-Public*(Individual) Public Minimum Lot Size 65,340 sq. feet 21,780 sq. feet Minimum Lot Width 150 feet 100 feet Maximum Sewage Flow 600 gpad** 1,200 gpad  * In this context, Non-Public means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a public water supply system. ** Gpad = gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. (Ord. of 2-8-16(1)) 
Secs. 34-494—34-504. - Reserved. 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 38-1. - Enforcement.     Whenever the fire department is answering an alarm or operating at the scene of a fire or other emergency, every enrolled member of the department is hereby empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all provisions of this article and any other code provisions the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to assist in the control of the fire or other emergency. (Code 1980, § 3-2-4) 
Sec. 38-2. - Fire limits.     The fire limits of the city are hereby defined as all that area within the city limits. (Code 1980, § 3-2-22) 
Sec. 38-3. - Tampering with alarm system.     It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the city limits. (Code 1980, § 3-2-5) 
Sec. 38-4. - False fire alarms.     It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully, maliciously or mischievously turn in or give or cause to be turned in or given a false fire alarm within the city limits. (Code 1980, § 3-2-6) 
Secs. 38-5—38-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 38-36. - Fire chief and members.     The fire department shall be headed by a fire chief and such other paid and volunteer members and employees as may be determined necessary by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 38-37. - Workers' compensation extended to volunteers.     Volunteer firefighters who are members of the fire department providing services to the residents and taxpayers of the city are hereby extended coverage for workers' compensation in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. (Res. of 9-12-83, § 1) 
Chapter 42 - FLOOD CONTROL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building construction, ch. 14. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. of July 27, 2009(1), amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 42-31—42-115, was entitled "Floodplain Management" and pertained to similar subject matter. 
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 
Sec. 42-31. - Authorization.     Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a), have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and City Council, of Vienna, Georgia, does ordain as follows. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-32. - Findings of fact. (a)  The flood hazard areas of Vienna, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. (b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-33. - Statement of purpose.     It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: (1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; (2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; (3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; (4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and (5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-34. - Objectives.     The objectives of this article are to: (1)  Protect human life and health; (2)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; (3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; (4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; (5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; (6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and (7)  Insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Secs. 42-35—42-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 42-56. - Lands to which this article applies.     This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Vienna, Georgia. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-57. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. (a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 11, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. (b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 11, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Dooly County are hereby adopted by reference. (c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties, but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: City of Vienna, 203 Cotton Street, Vienna, GA. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-58. - Establishment of development permit.     A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-59. - Compliance.     No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-60. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.     This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-61. - Interpretation.     In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit, nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-62. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.     The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Vienna or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-63. - Penalties for violation.     Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than the maximum fine provided by state law, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Vienna from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Secs. 42-64—42-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 42-86. - Designation of ordinance administrator.     The Mayor of the City of Vienna or his appointee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of the ordinance from which this article derives. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-87. - Permit procedures.     Application for a development permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer of the City of Vienna on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: (1)  Application stage. a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 42-112(2); d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. (2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. a.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. b.  The zoning officer shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. c.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-88. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.     Duties shall include, but shall not be limited to: (1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. (2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. (3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. (4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-57, then the zoning officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. (5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 42-87(2). (6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 42-87(2). (7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the zoning officer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 42-87(1)c., and subsections 42-112(2) or 42-114(2). (8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. (9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. (11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the zoning officer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. (12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the zoning officer and shall be open for public inspection. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Secs. 42-89—42-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
Sec. 42-111. - General standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; (3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; (4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. (5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; (6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; (7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; (8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; (9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and (10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-112. - Specific standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-111(4), "Elevated buildings". a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. (2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 42-88(6). (3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels; (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (see subsection 42-111(6), above) d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3) of this section. (4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-57, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-113. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones).     Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-57, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: (1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-57, then the zoning officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions in subsections (2) and (3) shall apply. (2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. (3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-111(4) "Elevated buildings". a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The zoning officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-114. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways.     Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-57, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: (1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. (2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 42-112. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-115. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).     Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in section 42-57 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-111(4), "Elevated buildings". The zoning officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level, plus one foot above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 42-87(1)c. and (2). (3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-116. - Standards for subdivisions. (a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; (b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; (c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and (d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Sec. 42-117. - Standards for critical facilities. (a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. (b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Secs. 42-118—42-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
Sec. 42-141. - Procedures and conditions. (a)  The board as established by mayor and city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. (b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the mayor and city council or administration of this article. (c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision to the superior court of the state as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. (d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. (e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (g)  In reviewing such requests, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. (h)  Conditions for variances: (1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. (2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. (3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (4)  The zoning officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. (i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Secs. 42-142—42-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 42-161. - Defined terms.     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application.     Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.     Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction".     Appeal means a request for a review of the mayor and city council's interpretation of any provision of this article.     Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.     Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 42-57.     Base flood, means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.     Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.     Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.     Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.     Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: (1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; (2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; (3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and (4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.     Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment.     Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.     Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 9, 1982.     Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 14, 1980.     Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.     Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.     Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.     Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.     Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.     Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.     Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.     Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.     Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.     Historic structure means any structure that is: (1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; (2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: (3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.     Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.     Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.     Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.     Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.     National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 9, 1982 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after February 14, 1980 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.     New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after February 14, 1980.     North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps.     Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: (1)  Built on a single chassis; (2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.     Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.     Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.     Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.     Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.     Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. (NOTE: The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.) This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed.     For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".     Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.     Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article.     Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Secs. 42-162—42-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SEVERABILITY 
Sec. 42-181. - Severability.     If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. (Ord. of 7-27-09(1)) 
Secs. 42-182—42-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 25, 2014(2), set out provisions intended for use as §§ 42-120—42-127. For purposes of clarity and to preserve the numbering style of this Code, with the concurrence of the city and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. III, §§ 42-201—42-208. 
Sec. 42-201. - General provisions. (a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: (1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; (2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; (3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; (4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; (5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; (6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and (7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. (b)  Applicability. (1)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b)(2) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee to be a hotspot land use; or d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (b)(1)a. and b. above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. (2)  The following activities are exempt from this article: a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee. (c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. (d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. (e)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (f)  Georgia Stormwater Design Manual. The City of Vienna, Georgia will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. (Ord. of 7-25-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-202. - Definitions.     "Applicant" means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval.     "Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.     "Conservation easement" means an agreement between a land owner and the City of Vienna, Georgia or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership.     "Detention" means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge.     "Detention facility" means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.     "Developer" means a person who undertakes land development activities.     "Development" means a land development or land development project.     "Drainage easement" means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement.     "Erosion and sedimentation control plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities.     "Extended detention" means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater.     "Extreme flood protection" means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more.     "Flooding" means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands.     "Greenspace" or "open space" means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state.     "Hotspot" means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.     "Hydrologic soil group (HSG)" means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.     "Impervious cover" means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface.     "Industrial stormwater permit" means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.     "Infiltration" means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil.     "Inspection and maintenance agreement" means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project.     "Jurisdictional wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.     "Land development" means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover.     "Land development activities" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.     "Land development project" means a discrete land development undertaking.     "New development" means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site.     "Nonpoint source pollution" means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.     "Nonstructural stormwater management practice" or "nonstructural practice" means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions and vegetated channels.     "Off-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site.     "On-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site.     "Overbank flood protection" means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the 2-year through 25-year frequency storm events.     "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site.     "Permit" means the permit issued by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity.     "Person" means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     "Post-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require.     "Pre-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions.     "Project" means a land development project.     "Redevelopment" means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.     "Regional stormwater management facility" or "regional facility" means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced.     "Runoff" means stormwater runoff.     "Site" means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located.     "Stormwater better site design" means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management.     "Stormwater management" means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.     "Stormwater management facility" means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff.     "Stormwater management measure" means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice.     "Stormwater management plan" means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article.     "Stormwater management system" means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site.     "Stormwater retrofit" means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.     "Stormwater runoff" means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation.     "Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff.     "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. (Ord. of 7-25-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-203. - Permit procedures and requirements. (a)  Permit application requirements. (1)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. (2)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee a permit application on a form provided by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee for that purpose. (3)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: a.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; b.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (c) of this section; c.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, if applicable; d.  Performance bond in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, if applicable; and e.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. (b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. (1)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer [shall] meet with the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should [shall] take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. (2)  To accomplish this goal the following information should [shall] be included in the concept plan which should [shall] be submitted in advance of the meeting: a.  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. b.  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. c.  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. (3)  Local watershed plans, the Bartow County Greenspace Projection Plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. (c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. (1)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in subsection (d) below. (2)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the Georgia Stormwater Design Manual. (3)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the Georgia Stormwater Design Manual. This includes: a.  Common address and legal description of site; b.  Vicinity map; c.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, pre-development conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. d.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in subsection (d) of this section; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in subsection (d) must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. e.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in subsection (d); drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. f.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Design Manual. g.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. h.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. i.  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. j.  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. k.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, as provided in subsection (d) below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d) of this section. l.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. (d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. (1)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Vienna, Georgia requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. (2)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. (3)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. (4)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. (5)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 42-206 of this article. (6)  The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, Georgia in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. (e)  Performance and maintenance bonds. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall require posting of bonds or other security to guarantee performance of construction and/or maintenance obligations hereunder. (f)  Application procedure. (1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee. (2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (a) above of this section, (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). (3)  The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. (4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (f)(3) above and this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. (5)  Upon a finding by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met, including, but not limited to, the posting of securities by the applicant in an amount and for a time period to be determined by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee. (6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; c.  The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee; and e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by subsection 42-205(b). (g)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. (h)  Modifications for off-site facilities. (1)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. (2)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. (3)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property; b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams and other structures; c.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. (Ord. of 7-25-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-204. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria.     The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: (1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. (2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; b.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. (3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the 1-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (2), above is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the 2-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. (4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. (5)  Structural stormwater controls. a.  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. b.  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. (6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. (7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. (8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. (Ord. of 7-25-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-205. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. (a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna or his/her designee or conducted and certified by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia who has been approved by the City of Vienna, Georgia. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: (1)  The date and location of the inspection; (2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; (3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and (4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. (b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. A final inspection by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee is required before the release of any securities can occur. (Ord. of 7-25-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-206. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. (a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. (1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. (2)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) hereof. (3)  Inspection programs by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. (b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. (c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee. (d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. (Ord. of 7-25-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-207. - Violations, enforcement and penalties.     Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. (1)  Notice of violation. If the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). (2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: a.  Stop-work order. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may issue a stop-work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein; provided the stop-work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee or the City of Vienna, Georgia Police Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Municipal Court of the City of Vienna, Georgia to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 7-25-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-208. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectively. The ordinance codified in this article shall become effective on the 28th day of July, 2014. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. of 7-25-14(2)) 
Secs. 42-209—42-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 28, 2014(2), set out provisions intended for use as §§ 42-130—42-142. For purposes of clarity and to preserve the numbering style of this Code, with the concurrence of the city and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. IV, §§ 42-230—42-242. 
Sec. 42-230. - Title.     This article shall be known as the "City of Vienna Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-231. - Findings and purposes. (a)  Findings. Whereas, the City of Vienna, Georgia finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: (1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; (2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; (3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; (4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; (5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; (6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; (7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; (8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; (9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; (10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; (11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. (b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: (1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the City of Vienna, Georgia for the protection of water resources; and (2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-232. - Definitions.     "Buffer" means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by subsection 42-234(a), below), lying adjacent to the stream.     "Impervious cover" means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt.     "Land development" means any land change, including but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover.     "Land development activity" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.     "Land disturbance" means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover.     "Land disturbance activity" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance.     "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood.     "Parcel" means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records.     "Permit" means the permit issued by the City of Vienna, Georgia required for undertaking any land development activity.     "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     "Protection area" or "stream protection area" means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream.     "Riparian" means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment.     "Setback" means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection 42-234(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream.     "Stream" means any stream, beginning at: (1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or (2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or (3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream.     "Stream bank" means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream.     "Stream channel" means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream.     "Watershed" means the land area that drains into a particular stream. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-233. - Applicability.     This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 42-232 of this article. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. b.  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities including but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. (2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property: a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: -  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; -  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; -  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; -  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; -  Unpaved foot trails and paths; -  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (2)a., above. c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer.     After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities.     Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection 42-234(b), below. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-234. - Land development requirements. (a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: (1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. (2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. (3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. (b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: (1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Vienna finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Vienna finds may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. (2)  Except as provided above, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Vienna, Georgia. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Vienna, Georgia. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. (3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. (4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-235. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements.     This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-236. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. (a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: (1)  A site plan showing: a.  The location of all streams on the property; b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback. (2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and (3)  Any other documentation that the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. (b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-237. - Responsibility.     Neither the issuance of a development permit, nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City of Vienna, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-238. - Inspection. (a)  The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee in making such inspections. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. (b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-239. - Violations, enforcement and penalties.     Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. (1)  Notice of violation. If the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). (2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: a.  Stop-work order. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may issue a stop-work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop-work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or the City of Vienna, Georgia Police Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-240. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. (a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of City Administrator of the City of Vienna, Georgia or his/her designee may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia shall be entitled to a hearing before the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. (b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Dooly County, Georgia. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-241. - Severability.     If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this article. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Sec. 42-242. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectively. The ordinance codified in this article shall become effective on the 28th day of July, 2014. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. of 7-28-14(2)) 
Secs. 42-243—42-265. - Reserved. 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Sec. 46-1. - Chief of police department.     Subject to the general supervision of the city administrator, the police department shall be under the direction and control of the police chief. (Code 1980, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Composition of department.     The department shall consist of those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 46-3. - Responsibilities.     The department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accident, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments, and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 3-1-3) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Nuisances, § 34-31 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
Sec. 50-1. - Disorderly conduct. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following subsections of this section: (1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health; (2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; (3)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; (4)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; (5)  Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; (6)  Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick, to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid or abet therein; (7)  Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; (8)  Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or (9)  Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority. (b)  Any person who shall violate subsection (a) of this section may be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct and, on conviction thereof, may be found guilty of disorderly conduct. (Code 1980, § 9-1-1) 
Sec. 50-2. - Posting signs on poles without consent.     It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner of the property. (Code 1980, § 9-1-4) 
Sec. 50-3. - Weapons; discharge in city.     It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms, including air rifles, in the city limits. (Code 1980, § 9-1-5) 
Sec. 50-4. - Bicycles.     It shall be unlawful to ride any bicycle on any sidewalk within the central business district as designated on the official zoning map. (Code 1980, § 9-1-6) Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Sec. 50-5. - Public indecency. (a)  Authority to enact prohibitions by ordinances. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8(e) the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia, does hereby act to prohibit public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8, together with manner of dress. (b)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place, which includes but is not limited to, all areas owned by or controlled by any governmental entity and those areas zoned as C-1, C-2, I-1, and I-2 or to be visible while in such public places within the corporate limits of the City of Vienna wearing pants, skirts, shorts, or any other garment of clothing which exposes any portion of a person's mammalia, genitals, pubic area, or buttocks or allows any other display of the skin or garments not intended for public display in a lewd and obscene fashion. (c)  Punishment for violation of ordinance. Any person violating subsection (b) of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $105.00 and not more than $362.00, and shall be subject to not less than eight or more than 24 hours of community service. (Ord. of 7-27-09(2)) 
Chapter 52 - PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES 
Sec. 52-1. - General provisions.     The mayor and council may establish designated and named parks and recreation facilities. At the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the parks and recreation facilities located within the corporate limits of the City of Vienna are as follows: George Busbee Park Anthony Bowens Park Vienna Community Center/Oakdale Center Burton Street Park     The city may at any time add, delete, or enlarge any existing or new parks and recreation facilities, without necessity of amending the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-2. - Rules and regulations generally.     The mayor and council may establish reasonable rules and regulations covering the operation of the named city parks and recreation facilities. When these rules and regulations are initially posted and/or displayed on the facility premises involved, such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law and any person committing any acts in violation hereof shall be deemed to have violated this section and shall be punished as set forth in section 1-11. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Secs. 52-3—52-5. - Reserved. 
Sec. 52-6. - Group use of facilities. (a)  City park and recreation facilities are available to the public on a "first available, first use" basis. (b)  Any group of persons, not for profit organizations, or governmental entities may reserve use of the pavilion(s) located in the city park and recreation facilities by written request to the designated employee at the Vienna City Hall. (c)  Not for profit groups or entities or governmental entities wishing to use the city park and recreation facilities as part of any fundraising activity may do so only after securing prior written approval from the appropriate designated employee at the Vienna City Hall. (d)  No commercial use of the city park and recreation facilities shall be permitted. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-7. - Hours of operation.     The park and recreation facilities of the city shall be open to the public between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily for use by the citizens of the City of Vienna and the public. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-8. - Presence in park at night.     It shall be unlawful for any person to be in or occupy any part or portion of a city park or recreation facility from 10:01 p.m. to 7:59 a.m. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-9. - Fighting and obscene language prohibited.     Conduct which would constitute fighting or obscene language will not be permitted at any time in or on the city park and recreation facilities. The conduct as defined in section 50-1 of the Code of Ordinances is prohibited. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-10. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. (a)  Alcoholic beverages as used in this chapter are defined in section 6-1 of the Code of Ordinances. (b)  Per section 6-2 of the Code of Ordinances, it shall be unlawful to possess alcoholic beverages in or about any city park or recreation facility. (c)  Per section 6-3 of the Code of Ordinances, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have possession of alcoholic beverages in or about any city park or recreation facility. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-11. - Prohibited drugs.     As per O.C.G.A. ch. 13, delineated as "Controlled Substances" and more specifically as set forth in Article 2, Part 1, being O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21 et seq., it shall be unlawful to possess or consume any pharmaceutical or other controlled substance as listed in said Part 1 in any city park or recreation facility without a valid written prescription issued by a licensed medical provider with appropriate DEA number. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-12. - Damaging public property. (a)  It shall be unlawful to destroy, deface, or damage any city park or recreation facility equipment or furnishings or playground equipment located thereon.     (b) The relocations or removal of any city park and recreation facility benches, furniture, or other equipment shall be considered unlawful and considered to be damaging public property. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-13. - Damaging vegetation.     (a) It shall be unlawful to break, cut or otherwise damage any shrubbery, flowers, trees, or other growing vegetation located in any city park or recreation facility. (b)  It shall be unlawful to destroy, break, cut or otherwise damage any shrubbery, hedges, flowers, trees, or poles on city park and/or recreation facility by use of motor vehicle and the same shall be considered and constitute reckless driving. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-14. - Vehicles.     It shall be unlawful to drive or operate any motorized vehicle in a city park or recreation facility other than upon marked roadways and parking facilities furnished for such purposes of driving or operating. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-15. - Littering.     As set forth in section 62-38, dumping or depositing of litter shall be unlawful according to the acts set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of said section 62-38. Litter is defined in section 62-36, as all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brick bats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, aluminum cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or other discarded materials of every kind and description except by depositing the same in receptacles provided for the purpose of receiving such without overflow. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-16. - Animals.     Pets are permitted in city park and recreations facilities. However, any animal which is required to be registered by either this Code of Ordinances in section 10-32, or Georgia law must have evidence of registration. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to not have physical control of animals by leash within the confines or on the premises of any city park or recreation facility. The owner or custodian of any animal shall remove any excrement created by said animals while in the city park or recreations facility. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-17. - Advertising.     It shall be unlawful to place any sign or placard in any city park and recreation facilities or distribute any circulars or other advertising matter therein. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Sec. 52-18. - Noise control.     Unless approved by the mayor and city council and written shown, no person shall generate or allow to be generated any loud unnecessary, unusual noise within any city park or recreation facility as listed and defined in section 34-101 of the Code of Ordinances by any devices as enumerated in section 34-102 of the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Secs. 52-19—52-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 52-26. - Enforcement and penalty.     The police department shall have jurisdiction to enforce municipal and state laws in city parks and recreation facilities. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Vienna is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in section 1-11. (Ord. of 7-22-13) 
Secs. 52-27—52-30. - Reserved. 
Chapter 54 - PEDDLERS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Occupation taxes, § 70-181 et seq. 
Sec. 54-1. - Refusing to leave.     Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the premises and not return thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 54-2. - Entrance to premises restricted.     It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when such premises are posted with a sign stating, "no peddlers allowed" or "no solicitations allowed" or other words to that effect. 
Sec. 54-3. - Misrepresentations concerning goods or services.     It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality or nature of his goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
Sec. 54-4. - Hours of business.     It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling within the city between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and 9:00 a.m., except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer, or at any time on Sunday. 
Sec. 54-5. - Activity in roadways.     It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle any goods, wares, merchandise or services, or to solicit any contributions of any kind for any charitable, educational or other purpose, while standing in or upon any public roadway. 
Chapter 58 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building construction, ch. 14. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Duties regarding zoning, § 82-165. 
Sec. 58-31. - Name of board of zoning appeals.     The official name of the board of zoning appeals shall be the City of Vienna Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Sec. 58-32. - Officers.     Annually, at the regular meeting of the board of zoning appeals held in the month of April, the board of zoning appeals shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman and shall appoint a secretary-treasurer. The officers may succeed themselves. 
Sec. 58-33. - Chairman.     The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the board of zoning appeals and at other meetings and public hearings called by the board of zoning appeals. He shall call special meetings of the board of zoning appeals when required, and shall transmit reports, plans and recommendations of the board of zoning appeals to the mayor and council, and in general, shall act as spokesman for the board of zoning appeals. 
Sec. 58-34. - Vice-chairman.     The vice-chairman of the board of zoning appeals shall serve as chairman in the absence or the disability of the chairman. In the event of the death or resignation of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall perform the latter's duties until such time as the appeals board shall elect a new chairman. 
Sec. 58-35. - Secretary-treasurer.     The secretary-treasurer shall assist the chairman in the preparation of an agenda for board of zoning appeals meetings, shall prepare and send out notices for regular and special meetings, shall prepare and distribute minutes of board meetings, and shall establish and maintain the board's files. 
Sec. 58-36. - Additional duties.     The chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary-treasurer of the board of zoning appeals shall perform such other duties and functions as may from time to time be required by the board or by its bylaws. 
Sec. 58-37. - Acting chairman.     In the absence of both chairman and vice-chairman, the remaining members of the board of zoning appeals, if consisting of a quorum, shall elect an acting chairman for that meeting. 
Sec. 58-38. - Regular meetings.     The regular meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be held as called by the board from time to time. 
Sec. 58-39. - Disqualification of members.     If any member of the board of zoning appeals shall find that his property or personal interests are involved in the matter, he shall disqualify himself from voting in that matter. 
Sec. 58-40. - Amendments to bylaws.     Changes may be made to the bylaws of the board of zoning appeals by the affirmative vote of three members of the board after being presented to the board of zoning appeals at two consecutive meetings, one of which shall be a regular meeting. 
Secs. 58-41—58-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING COMMISSION[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Duties regarding zoning, § 82-164. 
Sec. 58-71. - Established.     In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city, which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the planning commission is hereby created and established. (Code 1980, § 6-1-1) 
Sec. 58-72. - Membership.     The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city and appointed by the mayor and council. The terms of members shall be for two years, except that in the appointment of the first planning commission under the terms of this article, two members shall be appointed for a term of one year, and three members shall be appointed for a term of two years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council, who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. (Code 1980, § 6-1-2) 
Sec. 58-73. - Organization; rules; staff and finances. (a)  The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. (b)  The planning commission may appoint any employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. The expenditures of the planning commission shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 6-1-3) 
Sec. 58-74. - Powers and duties. (a)  From and after the time the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, the planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, together with all requirements of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Act. (b)  As to special exception uses and the consideration thereof, the following shall be required: (1)  A written application for a special exception use is submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested, together with such fees as shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (2)  Notice shall be given at least 15 days in advance of public hearing. The owner of the property for which special exception use is sought or his agent shall be notified by mail. Notice of these hearings shall be posted on the property for which special exception use is sought, at the City Hall, and in one other public place at least 15 days prior the public hearing. (3)  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. (4)  The planning commission shall make a finding that is empowered under the section of chapter 82 described in the application to recommend a special exception use, and that the recommendation as to the special exception use would not adversely affect the public interest. (5)  Before any special exception use recommendation shall be submitted to Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna for approval or denial, the zoning commission shall make written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual special exception use requests and that satisfactory provision and arrangement will be made concerning the following, where applicable: a.  Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe; b.  Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in subsection (b)(1) of this section and the economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the special exception use on adjoining properties and properties generally in the district; c.  Refuse and service areas; d.  Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and compatibility; e.  Screening and buffeting with reference to type, dimensions and character; f.  Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district; g.  Required yards and other open space; and h.  General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district. (Code 1980, 6-1-4; Ord. of 9-23-13(1)) 
Secs. 58-75—58-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AREA PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sec. 58-106. - Membership.     The West Central Georgia Area Planning and Development Commission shall consist of two members from each of the counties participating in the area planning commission. Of the two members from each county, one shall be appointed by the governing authority of the municipality wherein the county seat is located and the other member shall be appointed by the governing authority of the county. (Code 1980, § 6-1-11) 
Sec. 58-107. - Term of office; compensation.     The term of office for all members of the area planning commission shall be five years, except that the initial appointment by the mayor and council shall be for a term of one year. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment that has become vacant. The appointing authority shall have the power to remove for cause, on written charges, after public hearing any member it may appoint. All members shall serve without compensation. (Code 1980, § 6-1-12) 
Sec. 58-108. - Organization, rules, staff and finances.     The area planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its appointive members. The term of office of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be for one year or until reelected or their successors are elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an employee of the commission. The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the chairman or board may determine; shall adopt rules for the transaction of business; and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. In the performance of its duties, the commission may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend such funds, and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. It may make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. (Code 1980, § 6-1-13) 
Sec. 58-109. - Powers and duties.     It shall be the function and duty of the area planning commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity or the general welfare as well as the efficiency and economy in the development of the entire West Central Georgia area and each political subdivision therein. In general, the commission shall have such powers and duties and responsibilities as set forth in the General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended. (Code 1980, § 6-1-14) 
Secs. 58-110—58-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sec. 58-141. - Activation.     There is hereby activated in the city the public body corporate and politic known as the Development Authority of the City of Vienna, which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law. (Code 1980, § 6-1-21) 
Sec. 58-142. - Composition.     The development authority of the city shall be composed of seven members. (Code 1980, § 6-1-21) 
Sec. 58-143. - Terms.     Each person appointed to the development authority of the city shall serve for six years or until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. (Code 1980, § 6-1-21) 
Sec. 58-144. - Board of directors.     The board of directors of the development authority of the city shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities, and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. (Code 1980, § 6-1-21) 
Secs. 58-145—58-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 58-171. - Purpose.     In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Vienna, Georgia, is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; the Vienna City Council, Vienna, Georgia, hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § I) 
Sec. 58-172. - Definitions.     Building means building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn.     Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district.     Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing.     Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site, which affect the historical character of the property.     Historic district means a geographical definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but links by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the Vienna City Council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 58-227 of this article.     Historic property means an individual building, structure, site or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the Vienna City Council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 58-228 of this article.     Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: (1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; (2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; (3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; (4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or (5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structures within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features.     Object means an object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.     Site means a site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure.     Structure means a structure is a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § II) 
Secs. 58-173—58-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CREATION OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Sec. 58-196. - Creation of the commission.     There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Vienna Historic Preservation Commission" (hereafter "commission"). (Ord. of 11-24-03, § III(A)) 
Sec. 58-197. - Commission position within the City of Vienna.     The preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Vienna. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § III(B)) 
Sec. 58-198. - Commission members: number, appointment, terms and compensation. (a)  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall reside in the City of Vienna and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. (b)  To the extent available in the City of Vienna, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions and at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. (c)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: Two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § III(C)) 
Sec. 58-199. - Statement of the commission's powers.     The preservation commission shall be authorized to: (1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Vienna having the potential for designation as historic property; (2)  Recommend to the Vienna City Council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; (3)  Review applications for certificate of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; (4)  Recommend to the Vienna City Council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; (5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Vienna; (6)  Promote the acquisition by the City of Vienna of facade easements and conservation easements as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10.1 through 44-10.5); (7)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the Vienna City Council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; (8)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendation to the Vienna City Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; (9)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; (10)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and (11)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the Vienna City Council enter into agreements to do the same. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § III(D)) 
Sec. 58-200. - Commission's power to adopt rules and standards.     The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificate of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to the ordinance from which this article derives. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meeting and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § III(E)) 
Sec. 58-201. - Conflict of interest.     The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City of Vienna Charter. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § III(F)) 
Sec. 58-202. - Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources.     The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § III(G)) 
Sec. 58-203. - Records of commission meetings.     A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and actions. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § III(H)) 
Secs. 58-204—58-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECOMMENDATION AND DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 
Sec. 58-226. - Preliminary research by commission. (a)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historic resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City of Vienna. (b)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the Vienna City Council for designation. The commission shall present to the Vienna City Council recommendations for historic districts and properties. (c)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the Vienna City Council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: (1)  A physical description; (2)  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; (3)  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; (4)  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and (5)  Representative photographs. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § IV(A)) 
Sec. 58-227. - Designation of a historic district. (a)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: (1)  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; (2)  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, region or state; and; (3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. (b)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Vienna, Georgia. (c)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: (1)  Contributing (contributes to the district); (2)  Noncontributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (a) of this section). (Ord. of 11-24-03, § IV(B)) Cross reference— Historic district, § 58-331 et seq. 
Sec. 58-228. - Designation of a historic property.     Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, City of Vienna, or the State of Georgia, for one of the following reasons: (1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; (2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; (3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Vienna, the region, or the State of Georgia; or (4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, region or state. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § IV(C)) 
Sec. 58-229. - Requirement for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. (a)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the Vienna City Council, the commission, or: (1)  For historic districts: A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. (2)  For historic properties: A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. (b)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: (1)  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; (2)  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; (3)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and (4)  Require that the property or district be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Vienna, Georgia and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. (c)  Require public hearings. The commission and the Vienna City Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten, nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States Mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the City of Vienna tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. (d)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic the commission must submit the report, required in subsection 58-226(c), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. (e)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance of designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Vienna City Council. (f)  Vienna City Council acting on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the Vienna City Council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. (g)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the Vienna City Council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the Vienna City Council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States Mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the City of Vienna tax digest and a notice sent via United States Mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this ordinance. (h)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Vienna of the ordinance for designation. (i)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § IV(D)) 
Secs. 58-230—58-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPLICATION TO PRESERVATION COMMISSION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 
Sec. 58-256. - Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties.     After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(A)) 
Sec. 58-257. - Submission of plans to commission.     An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(B)) 
Sec. 58-258. - Interior alterations.     In its review of applications for certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(C)) 
Sec. 58-259. - Technical advice.     The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(D)) 
Sec. 58-260. - Public hearings on applications for certificate of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. (a)  The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. (b)  The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(E)) 
Sec. 58-261. - Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness.     Commission action. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any changes it deems necessary, or reject it. (1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificate of appropriateness for the above-proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and site features and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure or object shall be guided by: 1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 3.  Whether the building structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure site, tree or object. 2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree or object to the ambiance of a district. 3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree or object because of its design, texture, material, detail or unique location. 4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree or object from collapse. 7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(F)) 
Sec. 58-262. - Undue hardship.     When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provision, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provision, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(G)) 
Sec. 58-263. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. (a)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance of denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States Mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. (b)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(H)) 
Sec. 58-264. - Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. (a)  In the event the commission rejects an application it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. (b)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(I)) 
Sec. 58-265. - Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. (a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. (b)  The Vienna City Council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(J)) 
Sec. 58-266. - Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced.     A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(K)) 
Sec. 58-267. - Recording applications for certificate of appropriateness.     The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificate of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(L)) 
Sec. 58-268. - Acquisition of property.     The commission may, where such action is authorized by the Vienna City Council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(M)) 
Sec. 58-269. - Appeals.     Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Vienna City Council. Any such appeal must be filed with the Vienna City Council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 58-263(a) of this article or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection 58-263(b) of this article. The Vienna City Council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decision of the Vienna City Council may be taken to the Superior Court of Dooly County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Vienna ordinance violations. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § V(N)) 
Secs. 58-270—58-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND BUILDING AND ZONING CODE PROVISIONS 
Sec. 58-291. - Ordinary maintenance or repair.     Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § VI(A)) 
Sec. 58-292. - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair.     Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration or neglect: (1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings that allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. (2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps, which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. (3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 58-316 of this article and, at the direction of the Vienna City Council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § VI(B)) 
Sec. 58-293. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes.     Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with the existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § VI(C)) 
Secs. 58-294—58-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PENALTY PROVISIONS; SEVERABILITY 
Sec. 58-316. - Penalty provisions.     Violations of any provision of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the City of Vienna, Georgia. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § VII) 
Sec. 58-317. - Severability.     In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. (Ord. of 11-24-03, § VIII) 
Secs. 58-318—58-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - HISTORIC DISTRICT[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Designation of a historic district, § 58-227. 
Sec. 58-331. - Purpose.     In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; and in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate a business; and in accordance with the ordinance to establish a historic preservation commission in the city; to provide for the designation of historic properties of historic districts; to provide for issuance of certificates of appropriateness; to provide for an appeals procedure; to repeal conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes; the city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this division to designate a historic district in a geographically definable area containing buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art, or a combination thereof, which have special historic and aesthetic value or interest in representing one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, the county, or the state. (Ord. of 5-23-05, § 1) 
Sec. 58-332. - Designation of historic district and boundary description.     There is hereby created and designated in and for the city the Vienna Historic District with boundaries as follows: Vienna Historic District: Commencing at the corner of Third Street and West Pine Street, continuing south to the end of Second Street. From the corner of Second Street and Union Street, the district continues west to the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad, then continues south along the railroad to Cotton Street. From Cotton Street at the Railroad, the district continues east to the end of Cotton at Fifth Street. It should be noted that the district includes the strip of south Third Street that extends from Cotton to where the Vienna Downtown Commercial District ends. The district from the corner of Cotton and Fifth continues north to Union, then east on Union to GA Southern & Florida Railroad, continuing north to Pine Street. The district boundary then continues west back to the corner of Pine and Third Streets. South 5th Street Historic District Expansion Area: The South 5th Street Historic District Expansion area encompasses an area commencing at the intersection of East Cotton Street and South 5th Street; thence proceed south along said South 5th Street to the south property line of the improved real property identified as 312 South 5th Street. All properties abutting the west boundary of said South 5th Street which are designated and known according to the present (2015) numbering of improved property in said City as (A) 204 South 5th Street (V4-2-17); (B) 300 South 5th Street (V4-2-16); (C) 304 South 5th Street (V4-2-15); (D) 308 South 5th Street (V4-2-14); and (E) 312 South 5th Street (V4-2-13) and properties abutting the east boundary of said South 5th Street which are designated and known according to the present (2015) numbering of improved property in said City known as: (a) 107 South 5th Street (V9-1-12 and V9-1-13); (b) 205 South 5th Street (V9-1-7); and (c) 301 South 5th Street (V9-2-1). (Ord. of 5-23-05, § 2; Res. of 4-27-15, Exh. A) 
Sec. 58-333. - List of property in the Vienna Historic Business District and ownership thereof.     A list of properties located within the historic district as created in section 58-331 and the owner thereof set forth beside the name of each property is not set out herein, but can be found on file with the city. (Ord. of 5-23-05, § 3) 
Sec. 58-334. - Downtown Vienna Historic District boundaries on the official zoning map.     Upon designation the historic district shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. (Ord. of 5-23-05, § 4) 
Sec. 58-335. - Certificate of appropriateness.     Upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, no material change in the appearance of any structure, site, object of work or art within the designated historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the city's historic preservation commission. (Ord. of 5-23-05, § 5) 
Chapter 60 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 60-1. - Purpose and intent.     This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: (1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; (2)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments; (3)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments (4)  To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and (5)  To ensure that land is developed in conformity with the comprehensive plan of the city. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-2. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alley means a secondary way that affords vehicular service access to the side or rear of abutting property.     Cul-de-sac is a local street with only one outlet, sometimes called a dead-end street and constructed with a turnaround at its end.     Final plat is the final drawing of a subdivision prepared for filing for record with the clerk of the Dooly County superior court, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this chapter.     Lot means a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this chapter the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way.     Planning commission means the planning commission of the City of Vienna.     Street means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, land, alley, or other way. For the purpose of this chapter streets are divided into the following categories: (1)  Major streets. Those streets used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. (2)  Minor streets. Those streets used primarily for access to the abutting properties.     Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development; and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in one or more existing streets and includes resubdivision and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; however, the following are not included within this definition: (1)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the lots created are in accordance with other city regulations. (2)  The division of land into parcels where no new street is to be established and the resulting lots are equal to or larger than the standard required in the city, and a zoning classification of resulting lots remains the same as the zoning classification of the land before such division; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the rezoning, of such property on proper application and approval granted in accordance with this Code.     Subdivision, major means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into three or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development; and includes all division of land into two or more lots involving a new street, or a change in existing streets; or divisions of land involving the extension of water, sewer, or gas lines and includes resubdivisions and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. The following are not included within this definition: (1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the municipality; and (2)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved.     Subdivision, minor means all divisions of a tract of land into less than three lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or the land or area subdivided. The following are not included within this definition: (1)  All divisions of land involving a new street; a change in an existing street; or the extension of water, sewer, or gas lines; (2)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the municipality; and (3)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved.     Subdivider means the person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this chapter. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-3. - Zoning; conflict of standards. (a)  No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning regulations will be approved unless it conforms with such regulations. (b)  Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or building code, or other official standards, the highest standard shall apply. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-4. - Variances.     Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-5. - Enforcement authority.     The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director and the planning commission.     The director shall: (1)  Receive all subdivision plats; (2)  In cooperation with the planning commission review and approve or disapprove subdivision plats; (3)  Inspect subdivisions for compliance with the requirement of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-6. - Preliminary plat filing fee.     The developer shall be assessed a filing fee in the amount established by ordinance payable to the finance director at the time of filing the preliminary plat. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES FOR PLAT APPROVAL 
Sec. 60-7. - Generally. (a)  The procedure for formal review and approval of a subdivision plat shall consist of the following three steps: (1)  The subdivider should consult early and informally with the Director and/or other city technical staff for advice and assistance before the preparation of the preliminary sketch plat and its formal application for approval. This will enable the subdivider to become thoroughly familiar with these standards, the major street plan and other official plans or public improvements that might affect the area. Such informal review should prevent unnecessary and costly revisions. (2)  Prior to the making of any street improvement, or installations of utilities, the developer shall submit to the planning commission a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. After receiving the planning commission's approval of the preliminary plat and full concurrence and approval by the city, the developer may then proceed to grade the streets and install all improvements required by this chapter and any other applicable city ordinances. In lieu of the completion of all improvements prior to submission of the final plat, the developer may post a bond with the city, or certified check, in an amount and with surety satisfactory to the city and conditions satisfactory to the city, providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a period specified by the planning commission and stated in the bond. (3)  After completion of the physical development of the subdivision or the posting of a bond or certified check to guarantee the same, the developer shall submit to the planning commission a final plat together with any required certificates. The final plat, along with any deed restrictions, becomes the instrument to be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of this county. (b)  No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for record by the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county until the required improvements listed shall be constructed in satisfactory manner and approved by the appropriate approving agent. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-8. - Preliminary plat. (a)  At least ten days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission the subdivider shall submit to the building official's office three copies of the plat of the proposed subdivision drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, along with a receipt for the filing fee from the finance director. (b)  The preliminary plat shall meet the minimum standards of design and general requirements for the construction of public improvements as set forth in article III of this chapter and shall give the following information insofar as possible: (1)  Description: a.  Proposed name of subdivision. b.  Name and address of subdivider. c.  Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. d.  Location sketch map showing the relationship of the subdivision site to the surrounding area, including directions and distances to readily identifiable landmarks in the surrounding area. e.  Acreage to be subdivided. (2)  Existing conditions: a.  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, or as determined necessary by the city utilities director, when a new street is involved in a subdivision, including outline of wooded areas and classifications of land. b.  Zoning district classification on land to be subdivided and of adjoining land. c.  Names and addresses of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. d.  In case of resubdivision, a copy of existing plat with proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon. e.  Location of streams, lakes and swamps and land subject to flood as determined from a history of flooding (listed on appropriate FEMA map). f.  Location of existing and platted property lines, location, width and names of all platted roads, railroads, utility rights-of-way, public areas, existing buildings or structures. g.  Existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of boundary roads, with sizes, grades and invert elevations from public records, or from field surveys, or other sources. All sizes and data on all utilities shall be provided. h.  Certification by the county health officer when individual sewage disposal or water systems are to be installed. (3)  Proposed conditions: a.  Layout of roads, alleys and public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations. b.  Layout of all lots and the area of each lot, including building setback lines and lot divisions with scaled dimensions and utility easements with width and use on all lots. c.  Preliminary plan of all utilities to be constructed. d.  Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use. (c)  Within 30 days after submission of the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall review it and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to listed modifications, as a basis for preparation of the final plat. If a plat is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval will be stated in the records of the planning commission. Failure of the planning commission to act on the preliminary sketch within 30 days will be deemed approval of this plat, unless the developer agrees to an extension of time. (d)  Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat and shall not be indicated on the preliminary plat. (e)  The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse until a final plat based thereon is submitted within one year from the date of such approval, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission. (f)  After the planning commission has reviewed and acted on the preliminary plat, one copy will be returned to the developer, one copy will go to the building official's office and one copy will be retained in the records of the planning commission. (g)  After the planning commission has approved the preliminary plat, construction plans should be submitted to the building official and include the following: (1)  Layout of roads, alleys and public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations, grades and cross sections. (2)  Preliminary plan of sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe size and points of discharge, together with certified copy of all load design factors and computations. (3)  Preliminary plan of storm drainage system with glade, pipe size and location of outlet, together with certified copy of all design factors and computations. (4)  Preliminary plan of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves and all appurtenances. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-9. - Final plat. (a)  At least ten days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission the subdivider shall submit to the building official's office an original on reproducible mylar or vellum, and three copies, of the final plat. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat which such developer proposes to record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these standards. (b)  The original shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet on reproducible mylar or vellum and shall correspond to plat book dimensions. It shall be the developer's responsibility to provide the clerk of superior court with a plat that will fit in the plat book/cabinet. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with sheets lettered in alphabetical order as a key. (c)  When the plat has been approved, the original will be returned to the developer with the approval of the planning commission certified thereon for filing with the clerk of the superior Court of this county; one copy will be returned to the developer for such developer's records; one copy will be forwarded to the building official's office and one copy will be returned in the records of the planning commission. (d)  The planning commission shall approve or disapprove this final plat within 30 days after its submission to that body. Failure of the planning commission to act on this final plat within these 30 days shall be deemed approval of it. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. (e)  Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance by the public of the dedication of any streets or public ways or ground. (f)  The final plat shall comply with the plat act and shall give the following information: (1)  Certification that the applicant is the landowner, all parties with mortgage or lien interest to be included, and that applicant dedicates street rights-of-way and any sites for public use. (2)  Certification by a licensed surveyor to the accuracy of survey and plat and placement of monuments. (3)  Certification by the proper city officials that the developer has complied with the following: All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances. (4)  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, shall be placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording. (5)  Certificate on the plat to be signed by the secretary of the planning commission when the plat has been given final approval by the planning commission. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-10. - As-built construction plans. (a)  The as-built construction plans shall give the following information: (1)  Sufficient information to reproduce the plat on the ground, including tract boundary lines and their relation to established land lot lines, right-of-way, property lines of residential lots, and other sites with accurate dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, bearings, and angles on all lines, radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves with readings to the nearest minute. (2)  Profiles of grades for streets when required by the city (3)  Blocks designated by letter and lots by number or lots numbered consecutively. (4)  Location and description of monuments. (5)  Final plan of sanitary sewers with grade, pipe sizes, and point of discharge. (6)  Final plan of storm drains with grade, pipe sizes, and point of discharge. (7)  Final plan of water supply system with pipe sites and location of hydrants and valves. (b)  The as-built construction plans shall be furnished to the public works department on a three and one-half-inch disk or CD and shall be in a .DWG or .DXF format. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS 
Sec. 60-11. - Basic requirements; minimum standards. (a)  Land which the planning commission has found to be unsuitable for subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, or other features likely to be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the future residents shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods approved by the planning commission are formulated by the developer for meeting the problems created by the subdivision of such land. (b)  Land subject to flooding shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such other uses, as will not comply with chapter 46, the danger to health, life and property unless such land is not to be used as a building site. In applying this provision, land liable to flooding as determined from history shall be considered subject to flood. Fill shall not be used to raise the land in areas subject to flood unless the fill proposed does not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood heights. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-12. - Streets. (a)  Conformity to the major street plan. The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to the official major street plan; i.e., provision must be made for the location of thoroughfares as shown on the major street plan. (b)  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets at the same or greater width but in no case, less than the required minimum width. It shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivisions or where no such streets exist, it shall follow the projection of streets in related subdivided tracts so that other subdivisions may connect therewith. The city reserves the right to require the developer to meet minimum road design standards. (c)  Restriction of access. When a tract fronts on an arterial street or highway, the planning commission may require all residential lots to be provided with frontage on a minor residential street. (d)  Street right-of-way widths. The minimum width of right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on the major street plan, or if not shown on such plan, shall be not less than as follows: (1)  Arterial streets and highways: 80 to 120 feet. (2)  Commercial and industrial streets: 80 feet. (3)  Minor residential streets: a.  Curb and gutter: 50 feet. b.  Ditches: 60 feet. c.  For both of the above, a 15-foot utility drainage easement shall be provided on each side of the right-of-way. (e)  Exceptions. In cases where topography or other physical conditions made a street of the required minimum width impracticable, the planning commission may modify the above requirements. Through proposed business areas the street widths shall be increased ten feet on each side if needed to provide parking without interference to normal passing traffic. (f)  Additional width on existing street. Subdivisions that join existing streets shall dedicate additional rights-of-way if needed to meet the above minimum street width requirements. (1)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street. (2)  When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway shall be provided. (g)  Street grades and elevations. Grades on major streets shall not exceed seven percent and grades on other streets shall not exceed 12 percent. (h)  Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than two degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets 60 feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than 300 feet; on other streets, it shall not be less than 100 feet. (i)  Vertical curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in rates of grade for major streets, and one-half this minimum length for other streets. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet horizontally and one inch equals 20 feet vertically may be required by the planning commission upon recommendation of the city utilities director. (j)  Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Property line radii at street intersections shall not be less than 20 feet, and where the angle of street intersection is less than 75 degrees the planning commission may require a greater curb radius. To permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be reduced or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. (k)  Tangents. A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets. (l)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be allowed. (m)  Dead-end streets. (1)  Minor terminal streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than 600 feet long unless necessitated by topography. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 90 feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 110 feet for curb and gutter and 130 feet for ditches. (2)  Where phases may be proposed a temporary turnaround shall be provided. (n)  Private streets and reserve strips. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every lot of subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the city under conditions approved by the planning commission. (o)  Street names. Proposed streets that are obviously, in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the names for proposed streets duplicate names of existing streets, irrespective of the use of the suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "driveway," "place" or "court." (p)  Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for business purposes; alleys shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. (q)  Construction requirements. (1)  Every subdivision developer shall be required to make adequate provision for handling drainage problems, to grade and improve streets and alleys, to install curbs or invert ditches and to install street name signs in accordance with specifications established by the city public works director. (2)  All street design and construction and related matters shall be in strict accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, volume 1 "Construction of Roads and Bridges" and volume 2 "Materials for Roads and Bridges" and all revisions thereto. Where circumstances dictate variations from the standard specifications, the city public works director may vary the requirements providing the design or materials accepted are in all ways commensurate with good practice. (3)  All materials, equipment, labor and other matters related to street construction shall be provided by the developer. The following is a summary of the improvements required: a.  Grading. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the subdivider so that pavements and sidewalks, if installed in the future can be constructed on the same level plane. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished according to the specifications of the city. b.  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary curbs, pipes, culverts, headwalls, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, swale ditches, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. c.  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied all of the underground work (water mains, gas mains, etc. and all service connections) shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. d.  Roadway base. After preparation of the subgrade, the roadbed shall be properly based with one of the following: 1.  A six-inch sand clay base (class B); 2.  A six-inch graded aggregate base; or 3.  Six-inch mixed in place soil cement base. e.  Roadway surfacing. The paved surface shall be a two-inch compacted asphalt plant mix. f.  Minimum pavement width. Minimum pavement including paved gutters between curbs shall be as follows: 1.  Minor residential streets: 30 feet. 2.  Access routes: 38 to 44 feet. 3.  Arterial streets or through routes: As may be required. 4.  Ditch sections: 24 feet. g.  Curbs. Where the subdivider elects to provide curbs or it is deemed essential and necessary by the city utilities director, a permanent six-inch Portland cement concrete curb and gutter with a longitudinal storm drain system shall be installed. Backfill shall slope toward the curb to ensure drainage of surface water into the storm drainage system h.  Rural ditch section. Where the developer does not install curb and gutter, a rural ditch section shall be provided. Said ditch shall be constructed with a minimum of 3:1 slope on both sides of the ditch. And shall have a minimum channel width of at least two feet. All rural ditch sections shall be designed and constructed to accommodate a 25-year flood. No rural ditch section shall be constructed within a right-of-way less than 60 feet wide with a 15-foot utility/storm drainage easement, on both sides. All rural ditch sections shall be seeded or sodded to provide for a permanent stand of grass. i.  Outfall ditches. Outfall ditches shall be piped 130 feet from the right-of-way. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-13. - Blocks. (a)  In general, blocks shall be not less than 400 feet, nor more than 1,200 feet in length, except where topography or other conditions peculiar to the site make such dimensions impracticable. (b)  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topography conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission will approve a single tier or lots of minimum depth. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-14. - Lots. (a)  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot shall front upon a public street or road that is not less than 50 feet in width. Each lot shall be at least 30 feet in width at the front property line. (b)  Minimum size. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be such, as the planning commission deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such sewer and provide a connection to each lot. Where a public sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal may be used when meeting all applicable public health regulations. (1)  Residential lots served by a public sewer system shall be not less than 60 feet wide at the building setback line, nor less than 7,000 square feet in area. Where a rural ditch section is used, each lot shall maintain a 100-foot width at the setback line, not less than 13,000 square feet in size, and maintain a minimum frontage at the right-of-way line of 50 feet. Where a cul-de-sac is constructed using the rural ditch section method, the maximum number of lots on a cul-de-sac shall be five lots, with a minimum right-of-way diameter of 130 feet, and a minimum paving diameter being 90 feet. (2)  For residential lots not served by a public sewer system, the planning commission shall require that data from percolation tests be submitted as a basis for approving subdivisions dependent upon septic tanks as a means of sewage disposal, and no lot shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building line, nor less than 15,000 square feet in area. (3)  For residential lots not served by a public water supply or a public sewer system, no lot shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building line, nor less than one acre in size except upon approval of the county health officer and in no case shall any lot be less than one-half acre in size. (4)  The minimum size of residential lots to be served by a private source of water supply shall be determined by the county health officer after investigations of soil conditions, proposed sewer system and depth of groundwater. (5)  Size of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial properties shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. Platting of individual lots shall be avoided in favor of an overall design of the land to be used for such purposes. (6)  The size and widths of lots shall in no case be less than the minimum requirements of the zoning regulations in effect. (c)  Building setback lines. The minimum depth of building setback lines from any street shall be 30 feet. If, however, suitable provision is made in connection with the plat or restrictions pertaining to the plat, building lines may be varied, provided such variation does not reduce the setback more than five feet. Where rural ditch section construction for a subdivision is used the minimum building setback line from any street right-of-way shall be 50 feet for any zoning district. (d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently wider and larger to permit the additional side yard requirements of the zoning regulations or building setback lines outlined above. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-15. - Utilities. (a)  Water. Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly connected with the city water system. The lines shall conform with accepted standards of good practice for municipal water systems, and shall meet, as a minimum, the requirements of the state environmental protection division and the city. All materials, labor, equipment, and other matters related to the water distribution system shall be provided by the developer. (b)  Sewer. When the subdivision is located within the service area of a public sewer system, sanitary sewers shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the public system. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewer system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields and must be approved in writing by the county health officer. All materials, equipment, labor, and other matters related to the sanitary sewer system shall be provided by the developer and all sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the department of human resources of the state and standards of the city. (c)  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied to the street, all of the underground work, water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections shall be installed completed and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. Where the utility mains are off the pavement, the developer may elect to omit the installation of service connections providing that at such time as these service connections are needed, they may be jacked across the street without breaking or weakening the existing pavement. (d)  Easements for utilities. Except where alleys are permitted for that purpose, the city may require easements for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, and water mains or other utility lines, along rear lot lines or side lot lines, if, in the opinion of the city utilities director such action is desirable. Easements of the same or greater width may be required along the line of or across lots, where necessary for the extension of existing or planned utilities. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way along each side for the purpose of widening, depending, relocating, improving or protecting such drainage easement. (e)  Street lighting. Either underground or overhead electrical service shall be provided by the developer of a subdivision, through a public utility. All subdivisions with underground electrical lines shall have placed appropriate utility poles for street lighting. The installation of streetlights shall adhere to the following requirements: streetlights shall be installed at each street intersection and streetlights that are to be installed along the proposed blocks shall be equally spaced between street intersections. However, the maximum distance between any two streetlights shall not exceed 400 feet in length. After construction has been completed for an accepted phase or for an entire subdivision, and where the streets have been dedicated to the city, the city will be responsible for the costs associated with the operation of the streetlights. Streetlight design, size, and wattage must be approved by the city as part of the preliminary platting process. For example, a block 800 feet in length, it would be necessary to install three streetlights. For a block 1,100 feet in length, four streetlights would be necessary. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-16. - Monuments.     Concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, four feet long, with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at angle points and points of curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade. All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than three-fourths inches in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-17. - Large tracts.     When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-18. - Group housing developments.     A comprehensive group housing development, including the large-scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access, may be approved by the planning commission although the design of the project does not include standard street, lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from the foregoing standards can be made without destroying their intent. The developer shall provide proof that adequate access is provided for emergency vehicles. (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) (Ord. of 4-24-17(1)) 
Chapter 62 - SOLID WASTE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Nuisances, § 34-31 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 62-1. - Trash.     Fallen limbs, trees, cut limbs, cut trees and trash of this category shall be cut by the property owner into lengths of not more than four feet. Other trash, which shall include yard wastes, weeds, grass, trimmings, leaves, brush and pine straw, must be bagged. All trash and cuttings shall be placed as near as possible to the street or sidewalk right-of-way adjacent to the property owner's property but not so as to get into the street or block the sidewalk. At no time shall trash be placed in gutters, drains, walkways, or alleys or streets of the city. (Ord. of 5-24-76, § 1) 
Sec. 62-2. - Disposal of building debris.     Any building debris such as plaster, roofing, concrete, boards, brickbats and other such rubbish resulting from repairs, remodeling or construction of any building or private property will not be removed by the city. The owner of the premises shall be required or responsible to haul away and dispose of all such debris, including stumps, trees and limbs. (Ord. of 5-24-76, § 2) 
Secs. 62-3—62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40. 
Sec. 62-36. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or other discarded materials of every kind and description.     Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and any vacant areas, commercial, industrial, residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-37. - Penalty for violation.     Any person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 62-38. - Dumping or depositing of litter. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city, or any waters in this city, unless the litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed or placed on such property and specifically designated for the use of the general public, or the property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or by the city for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property. The provisions of this subsection shall not be read or construed to prohibit the owner or renter of any private property, nor any person acting with the consent of such owner or renter, from dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter upon such property or in any private receptacle or container maintained by the owner or renter of such private property for the sole and exclusive use of the household or business of such owner or renter. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any private property in this city, in any litter receptacle thereon, or any waters in this city, unless the person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or such person has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in such lawful possession. (Code 1980, § 9-1-7) 
Sec. 62-39. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. (a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of section 62-38, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated section 62-38. (b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter that is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of section 62-38 is discovered to contain any articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings that display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the articles belong or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated section 62-38. 
Sec. 62-40. - Duties of business owners, occupants. (a)  Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business located within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials thrown or left on those premises by his customers, and to take reasonable measures to prevent them from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. (b)  Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of the business where the articles of waste generated at such business may be disposed. (c)  Signs. Each business establishment shall place upon its premises, in a conspicuous place in close proximity to the receptacle required by subsection (b) of this section, a sign, which shall in essence convey to its customers a request that they use such receptacle for the disposal of waste material. 
Sec. 62-41. - Duty of customers.     It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials except in receptacles provided for such purpose. 
Chapter 66 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Interstate signs generally, § 14-106 et seq.; riding bicycles restricted, § 50-4; parades and processions, § 74-41 et seq. State Law reference— Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 66-1. - Sidewalk construction.     No sidewalk of any description, of any brick, wood or other material shall be built by any person without a written permit from the city. (Code 1980, § 4-1-7) 
Sec. 66-2. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged.     It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, batholithic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city that shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. (Code 1980, § 4-1-8) 
Sec. 66-3. - Sidewalks not to be obstructed or damaged.     It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or damage in any manner any sidewalk in the city by allowing trees, shrubbery, hedges, branches, roots or other debris to interfere therewith. Trees shall be pruned to a minimum height of ten feet above the sidewalk. (Code 1980, § 4-1-9) State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Secs. 66-4—66-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 
Sec. 66-36. - Permit to dig in streets.     No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles for any other purposes unless a written permit for such activity has been issued by the city administrator. A permit shall not be required where that work is performed under a contract with the city; but if that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city administrator and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. (Code 1980, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 66-37. - Application for permit.     All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in this article, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor, and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. (Code 1980, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 66-38. - City indemnified.     Any person obtaining a permit under this article agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. (Code 1980, § 4-1-3) 
Sec. 66-39. - Street repair.     When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening; and this refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and specifications issued by the city administrator. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city administrator, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Code 1980, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 66-40. - Leaving unprotected.     It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under this article to do any excavation of any kind that may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of the work. (Code 1980, § 4-1-5) 
Sec. 66-41. - Supervision and control.     All excavations and work in the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the city administrator, whose duty it shall be to inspect the same from time to time during the progress thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he shall make a final inspection and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is restored to a condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed from the site. Any person refusing or failing to comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation; and where any failure or refusal is continued after notice from the city administrator, every day's continuance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Code 1980, § 4-1-6) 
Chapter 70 - TAXATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Finance, § 2-106 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 70-1. - Fiscal year.     The fiscal year of the city shall commence on October 1 and end on September 30 of each year. (Code 1980, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 70-2. - Annual budget.     An annual budget shall be adopted by the mayor and council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if, for good and sufficient reasons, the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget is not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, this section automatically authorizes the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city. The proposed budget shall be prepared by the mayor and transmitted to the council for its review a minimum of four weeks before the required date of adoption. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. (Code 1980, § 2-5-2) 
Sec. 70-3. - Purchasing.     The city clerk shall be the purchasing agent of the city, and shall: (1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city, and sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus city equipment and supplies; and (2)  Maintain an inventory of all equipment owned by the city. (Code 1980, § 2-5-3) 
Secs. 70-4—70-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Sec. 70-36. - Tax rate.     An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefore shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 70-37. - Tax due and payable. (a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. (b)  Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before November 20; but in the event of adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, the city shall, within a reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by resolution of the mayor and council, after receipt from the county of the adjustment information, refund any overpayments or bill for any underpayments. (Code 1980, § 2-5-12) 
Sec. 70-38. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue; interest. (a)  For the collection of delinquent taxes, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the procedure provided by the laws of the state governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available process and remedies. (b)  A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state or county taxes. (c)  The amount due on all delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) of this section as well as any interest or penalty thereon shall be listed as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. (d)  Any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city clerk for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interests, fines or other revenue, within three calendar months and ten days after any payment is due; provided, that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the mayor and council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect but only upon finding that the city clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. (e)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, all fi. fas. issued under this article shall earn interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law and no penalty shall be charged except in lieu of interest. (Code 1980, § 2-5-13) 
Secs. 70-39—70-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Sec. 70-71. - Financial institutions business license tax.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations a business tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of those institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. (Ord. of 9-12-83, § 1) 
Sec. 70-72. - Due date; filing of return. (a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. These returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. (b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. (Ord. of 9-12-83, § 2) 
Secs. 70-73—70-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 70-106. - Insurers license fees.     There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 70-107, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. (Ord. of 10-24-94, § 1) 
Sec. 70-107. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance the insurer shall pay an additional license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk each year. (Ord. of 10-24-94, § 2) 
Sec. 70-108. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, not otherwise licensed.     There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 70-106 as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for each such location within the city. (Ord. of 10-24-94, § 3) 
Sec. 70-109. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers.     There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 70-106. (Ord. of 10-24-94, § 4) 
Sec. 70-110. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.     There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 70-106. (Ord. of 10-24-94, § 5) 
Sec. 70-111. - Due date for license fees.     License fees imposed in sections 70-106 and 70-107 shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. (Ord. of 10-24-94, § 6) 
Secs. 70-112—70-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAXES[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; general assembly authorized to provide by general law for use of proceeds of state alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment relating to alcohol and drug abuse, Ga. Const. art. III, § IX, ¶ VI(e). 
Sec. 70-141. - Malt beverage excise tax; imposition; collection. (a)  There is imposed and levied a specific tax upon all retail dealers in malt beverages within the city limits in the maximum amount allowed by state law. (b)  Each distributor, wholesale dealer or manufacturer selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall collect the excise tax as set forth in subsection (a) of this section and shall remit the tax to the city not later than the tenth of the month following collection. Each monthly remittance will be accompanied by invoice copies of all sales or deliveries to all retailers in the city for resale in the city, together with the sworn affidavit of such distributor, wholesale dealer or manufacturer, that the attached invoices are true, correct and complete. (Code 1980, § 2-5-41) State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 70-142. - Wine excise tax; imposition; collection. (a)  In addition to the annual retail wine license fee, there is hereby levied an excise tax in the maximum amount allowed by state law which shall be paid to the mayor and council on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the incorporated area of the city. The tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the city by the wholesale distributors on all wine sold to retailers in the incorporated area of the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering wine to any retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the following month. (b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which the tax has not been paid. (c)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the mayor and council a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the incorporated area of the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. State Law reference— Authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 70-143. - Distilled spirits excise tax; imposition; collection. (a)  In addition to the annual retail liquor license fee, there is hereby levied an excise tax in the maximum amount allowed by state law, which shall be paid to the mayor and council on all distilled spirits, displayed or stored in the city. The tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the city by the wholesale distributors on all distilled spirits sold to retailers in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax, together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer, on or before the tenth day of the following month. (b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits on which the tax has not been paid. (c)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the mayor and council a summary of all purchase invoices for distilled spirits sold to each retailer in the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. (Code 1980, § 7-2-56(b)) State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Sec. 70-144. - Tax in addition to license fee.     The excise tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to any license fee, occupation tax, or charge that may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail or wholesale within the city. (Code 1980, § 2-5-42) 
Sec. 70-145. - Retailers' records.     All retail dealers in malt beverages and/or wine, and all persons selling malt beverages and/or wine at retail, shall keep a complete and correct record of all purchases of malt beverages and wine, and shall require all persons from whom they purchase malt beverages or wine to furnish and deliver to them, at the time of delivery of such beverages, a correct invoice of purchase, which invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of six months from the date of purchase. Such invoices and all records of retailers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the city. All records of purchase shall be kept a period of at least three years from the date of such purchase or sale before being destroyed. 
Sec. 70-146. - Penalty for violation of article.     Any person who shall submit a return required by this article that is false or fraudulent, or who shall assist any person to evade the payment of any license tax provided in this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. (Code 1980, § 2-5-43) 
Secs. 70-147—70-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OCCUPATION TAXES[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Cross reference— Peddlers, ch. 54. 
Sec. 70-181. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Administrative fee is the component of the occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax.     Employee is an individual who works 40 hours per week and whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099. Part-time employees' total hours will be divided by 40 to determine the number of full-time equivalents.     Location or office means a fixed place located within the city from which a person conducts business, but shall not include a work site located in the city for less than six months for the purpose of serving a single customer or project.     Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city.     Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee.     Practitioners of professions and occupations are those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax.     Regulatory fee means a fee that approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city.     Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-1)) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-182. - Administrative fee.     A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal, or reopening of such accounts. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-2)) 
Sec. 70-183. - Regulatory fee. (a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk must pay a nonrefundable regulation fee in accordance with such schedule. (b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. (c)  Every business, individual, and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or city clerk upon request. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-3)) 
Sec. 70-184. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. (a)  An occupation tax based upon the number of employees in the state is levied upon the businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the State of Georgia in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. (c)  A business or practitioner subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming as exemption or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. (1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state, which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. (2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. (3)  A business or practitioner with locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s). (4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. (d)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. (e)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees who are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current year, the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees who are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, no later than December 31, the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business's or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk. (f)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-4)) 
Sec. 70-185. - Occupation tax certificate.     Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer or the city clerk upon request. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-5)) 
Sec. 70-186. - Practitioners of professions and occupations.     Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this article shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 70-184 or shall pay an occupation tax as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. On the tax return for 1996 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-6)) 
Sec. 70-187. - Exemptions. (a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: (1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; (2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; (3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3; (4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; (5)  Nonprofit agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; (6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; (7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; (8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; (9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or (10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. (b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes, or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-7)) 
Sec. 70-188. - Evidence of state registration when required.     Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-8)) 
Sec. 70-189. - Evidence of qualifications required if applicable. (a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. (b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-9)) 
Sec. 70-190. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. (a)  On or before February 1 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this article shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. (b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee(s). (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-10)) 
Sec. 70-191. - Confidentiality.     Information provided by the business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 18, art. 4. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-11)) 
Sec. 70-192. - Date due; penalty. (a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1. If any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of commencement of the business or regulated activity. (b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-12)) 
Sec. 70-193. - Enforcement; violations. (a)  It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees due and owing. (b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Charter and ordinances of the city and laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. (c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. (d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-11. (e)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business within the city. (f)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person's business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain or make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-13)) 
Sec. 70-194. - Public hearing.     After January 1, 1996, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution that will increase the occupation tax specified in section 70-184. (Ord. of 12-21-95, § 1(7-1-14)) 
Sec. 70-195. - Franchise fee for state-issued cable or video franchise. (a)  Cable or video franchise fee. The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. (b)  Authorized designee. The city hereby authorizes the mayor, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. (Ord. of 7-28-08, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 70-196—70-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- State Law reference— Transient occupancy tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq. 
Sec. 70-201. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows:     City. The City of Vienna and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Vienna is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq.     City clerk. The duly appointed City Clerk of the City of Vienna or his or her delegees.     Due date. The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed.     Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel.     Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment.     Guest room. A room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use.     Hotel. Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint.     Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings or accommodations.     Monthly period. The calendar months of any year.     Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room.     Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise.     Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than ten continuous days next preceding such date.     Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, limited liability company, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia, and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax.     Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-202. - Tax rate.     There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of six percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 70-204. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-203. - Collection of tax by lodging provider.     Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of six percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 70-204. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-204. - Exemptions.     No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident, or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereon; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-205. - Registration of lodging provider, form and contents; execution; certificate of authority.     Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-206. - Determination generally; returns; payments. (a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereon, until paid. (c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. (d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. (e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. (f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. (g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period that 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. (h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-207. - Deficiency determinations. (a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by an lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 70-206. (c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. (d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the order is filed, whichever period should last expire. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-208. - Determination if no return made. (a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 70-207(c). (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 70-206. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-209. - Collection of tax by city. (a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. (c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. (e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-210. - Administration of articles; record keeping. (a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. (b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. (c)  Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. (d)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-211. - Violations.     Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 70-203 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 70-206, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violations committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-212. - Effective date.     This article and the tax levied hereby shall become effective on the first day of the second month following its adoption. (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Sec. 70-213. - Use and proceeds of the tax.     The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4). (Ord. No. 07-10, 12-24-07) 
Secs. 70-214—70-225. - Reserved. 
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 46; riding bicycles restricted, § 50-4. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 74-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. (Code 1980, § 8-1-1) State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 74-2. - Temporary traffic regulations.     In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts; and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. (Code 1980, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 74-3. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices; schedule. (a)  The city administrator or his designee, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: (1)  Speed zones; (2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; (3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; (4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; (5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; (6)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; and (7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. (b)  The city administrator or his designee is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: (1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; (2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; (3)  Traffic lanes; and (4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. (c)  The city administrator shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (a) of this section, this schedule, and any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the mayor and council; and this schedule is hereby incorporated herein and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city administrator. (d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. (e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. (Code 1980, § 8-1-4) 
Sec. 74-4. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. (a)  No person owning, occupying or in any way controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city, so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. (Code 1980, § 8-1-5) 
Sec. 74-5. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited.     All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly circle the block or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. (Code 1980, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 74-6. - Speed limits—Generally.     No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic and use thereof, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. (Code 1980, § 8-2-2(a)) 
Sec. 74-7. - Same—General limit.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the city at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limit is posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street. 
Sec. 74-8. - Traffic signs, signals and markings.     All traffic shall obey and be directed by official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the mayor and council. (Code 1980, § 8-2-3) 
Sec. 74-9. - Jake brakes. (a)  A "jake brake" or any similar devices on any engine shall not be energized or otherwise used inside of the city limits of Vienna, Georgia. (b)  A "jake brake" is defined as a hydraulically operated device that operates a power producing diesel engine into a power absorbing retarding mechanism that produces a noise that is loud and excessive. (c)  Accordingly the use of all "jake brake" or similar devices within the city limits of Vienna, Georgia, is hereby prohibited from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. This section shall not apply to fire protection equipment or other emergency vehicles. (d)  Penalties for violation. Any person found to be in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. (e)  Validity. If any term or provision of this section shall be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable, the remainder thereof shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. of 10-23-07) 
Secs. 74-10—74-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 74-41. - Enforcement.     Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the authority of any officer to arrest a person engaged in any acts or activities for which a permit has been granted under this article, if the conduct of such person violates the laws, or if such person obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of the city or engages in acts that cause a breach of the peace. 
Sec. 74-42. - Dispersal of activity.     Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, congregation, parade, meeting, assembly or procession, or the conduct of two or more persons, except as authorized by any permit issued pursuant to division 2 of this article, the persons comprising such group shall disperse or move when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse such direction to move or disperse, and such refusal shall be a violation of this article. 
Secs. 74-43—74-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
Sec. 74-66. - Required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to organize or hold or participate in any parade, meeting, assembly or procession of persons and/or vehicles on the streets or sidewalks within the city unless such activity has first been authorized by a written permit for the activity. (Code 1980, §§ 7-6-2, 8-4-1) 
Sec. 74-67. - Application.     Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this division shall make application therefor to the chief of police, which application shall contain the following information: (1)  The name and local and permanent address of the applicant. (2)  The name and address of the person the applicant represents. (3)  The exact time and date of commencement and termination of each act or activity desired. (4)  The purpose, location and route of such act or activity, if applicable. (5)  The person, group, association or body to be authorized under the permit to do such act or activity and the number of persons to participate. (6)  The age of any minors who may participate in such activity, and the name of the person who will be responsible for such minors. (7)  Such other relevant information as the chief of police may require for the investigation of the applicant. (Code 1980, § 8-4-2) 
Sec. 74-68. - Determination of issuance.     In deciding whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this division, the chief of police shall consider: (1)  The number of persons to participate; (2)  Anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the activity; (3)  Schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have been issued; (4)  Adequacy of adult supervision for any minors scheduled to participate; (5)  Availability of city personnel whose presence on duty may be required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public; and (6)  Adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of public facilities in the proposed location. 
Sec. 74-69. - Issuance.     The permit required by this division shall be issued by the chief of police upon application therefor; however, such permit may be denied or refused if it shall appear that the applicant therefor or the act or activity requested by such application shall be a violation of law. 
Sec. 74-70. - Denial, modifications. (a)  If the chief of police determines from the application for a permit under this division that the proposed parade or march will unduly interfere with and impede traffic on the public streets, alleys and ways over which the parade or march will pass, and/or the public streets, alleys and ways that intersect the public streets, alleys and ways over which the parade or march will pass, he shall so advise the applicant in writing and give, in reasonable details, the reason he will not issue a permit for such parade or march, and shall suggest such modifications in the application that, if made, will not unreasonably interfere with and impede normal traffic on the public streets, alleys and ways by such parade or march. Such modifications may include: (1)  Changing or altering the route of the march or parade; (2)  Changing the date and/or time of day the parade or march will be made; (3)  Changing or altering the length of the march or parade; (4)  Changing the width of the parade or march, i.e., from requiring the whole width of the public street, alley or way to a lesser part of the width, to be specified; (5)  Any combination of the foregoing suggested areas of modifications; (6)  Any other modification that will cause such parade or march to not unduly interfere with and impede normal traffic on such public streets, alleys and ways of the city. (b)  If such suggested modifications shall be incorporated in an amended application for a permit, the chief of police shall forthwith issue a permit for such parade or march. (Code 1980, § 8-4-2) 
Sec. 74-71. - Deviation from conditions of permit.     It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any act or activity for which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this division to deviate from or alter any of the terms or conditions of such permit. 
Sec. 74-72. - Display.     Every person having a permit issued under the provisions of this division shall have such permit in his possession during the activity permitted thereby, and shall display such permit upon the request of any law enforcement officer. Failure to display such permit shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 74-73. - Revocation.     Any permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the chief of police for the violation of any law by the permittee. 
Sec. 74-74. - Contents; filing of copy.     Upon issuance of a permit required by this division, the permit shall contain therein all information contained in the application for the permit and shall be signed by the chief of police; and a signed copy of such permit shall be kept with the application, both on file in the office of the chief of police. 
Sec. 74-75. - Appeal to council.     Upon the denial of a permit required by this division, the applicant may appeal such decision to the mayor and council within one business day thereafter upon notice thereof to the city clerk and the payment of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1980, § 8-4-2) 
Secs. 74-76—74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING REGULATIONS 
Sec. 74-101. - Two-hour parking. (a)  Two-hour parking time limits are enforced in signed on-street areas in the following areas: The east side of South 3rd Street from Cotton Street to Union Street; Both sides of North 3rd Street from Union Street to Church Street; Both sides of East Union Street from 3rd Street to 4th Street. (b)  Enforcement of parking regulations is conducted from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Enforcement is not in effect before and after those times and on weekends and holidays. (c)  Restricted areas such as spaces designated for persons with disabilities, spaces marked "NO PARKING", and any other locations prohibited by law are always in effect. (d)  No person shall move his motor vehicle within a parking space for the purpose of extending or avoiding the parking time limit. (Ord. of 3-28-11) 
Secs. 74-102—74-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WRECKER QUALIFICATIONS/ROTATION LISTS 
Sec. 74-131. - Purpose. (a)  To establish a policy that will govern how the wrecker rotation will be maintained. (b)  To describe criteria by which wrecker service operators should govern themselves while conducting business within the city limits of Vienna. (c)  To ensure that wrecker companies utilized by the City of Vienna Police Department use and maintain safe roadworthy recovery vehicles. (d)  To specify the minimum required equipment for wrecker services utilized by the police department. (e)  To identify procedures for suspension of a wrecker service from a police department wrecker list. (Ord. of 12-14-15(1)) 
Sec. 74-132. - Policy.     It is the intent of the police department to utilize those wrecker services that desire to participate in business generated by the department. For purposes of this policy, a "wrecker service" means any wrecker company, corporation or business, including owner(s) and operator(s). An owner or part owner may not have more than one wrecker service appear on a single police department wrecker rotation list. The chief of police will establish and maintain a wrecker rotation list with Middle Flint Regional E911, except where exempt, which will insure that each service maintained on the department's wrecker list receives its fair share of requests. An owner or part-owner of a wrecker service business may not have more than one business appear on a single Department wrecker rotation list.     Those outside the department judge the department by the manner in which it conducts itself. With this in mind, the department is concerned with the conduct of those who operate in concert with it. It is therefore imperative that wrecker services utilized by the department conduct themselves in a professional manner, providing competent service at a reasonable and fair cost to the public, while complying with state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.     This policy governs the manner and method by which members of the police department may secure the services of a wrecker operator to tow and store vehicles upon the request of the owner/operator or as otherwise required by law. This policy and the acceptance of a wrecker service's application there under, shall not be construed as a contract or other form of agreement. All liability and responsibility for payment for the services of the wrecker service shall lie with the owner/operator, and neither the State of Georgia, the City of Vienna Police Department, nor any member of the City of Vienna Police Department are responsible for payment therefore.     This policy is created as a procedure for the police department and is created for the benefit of its members to assist in operations. This policy is not intended to create any benefit for any wrecker service or wrecker owner or operators of any wrecker service. This policy neither creates nor establishes any right owed nor does it create any legal duty owed to any wrecker service of its owners or operators. (Ord. of 12-14-15(1)) 
Sec. 74-133. - Procedures. (a)  Application of policy. (1)  This policy may not apply in the geographical area designated as outside of the city limits of the City of Vienna. (b)  General criteria for inclusion on the police department wrecker rotation list: (1)  A wrecker list will be valid for three years beginning January 1, 2016, and for each later applicable year, January 1. (2)  Wrecker services must reapply, in writing, for inclusion on the department's wrecker list. The police department will mail reminders to all wrecker services currently on the list by October 1 to be returned by November 1 of the year prior to the expiration date. An application must be submitted along with the following documentation: a.  Proof of a minimum of six months prepaid insurance coverage or a certificate of insurance; b.  A declaration of ownership demonstrating all parties (by name and address) who own any interest in the service; c.  Copy of title or registration for each wrecker operated in conjunction with the police department rotation list; d.  A copy of the company's current City of Vienna business license; e.  A current three-year certified motor vehicle report (MVR) from the Georgia Department of Driver Services (DDS) for each driver who will be operating a wrecker or tow truck; f.  A copy of the motor vehicle registration; g.  A photocopy of the driver's license for each person who will be driving a wrecker, and h.  A release signed by each owner and driver authorizing the police department to conduct criminal history background checks. (3)  Each wrecker service is subject to the inspection of pertinent documents, work sites, vehicles and equipment before renewal to the next term's wrecker list and at any time while operating on the department wrecker rotation list. Pertinent documents include but are not limited to bills, charging summaries and invoices. (4)  Upon receiving written request for inclusion on a wrecker list, the police chief will be responsible for the inspection of the wrecker service's documents, work sites, vehicles and equipment in order to insure compliance with department policy. Each wrecker company should be provided a copy of this policy and sign for receipt of same. a.  To ensure the safety and roadworthiness of recovery vehicles, the Vienna Police Chief shall coordinate with the department of motor carrier compliance division (MCCD) who in turn will perform annual safety compliance inspections of all wreckers, tow trucks, and recovery trailers used by the wrecker company to transport or tow vehicles. The department may accept the physical truck inspections for safety that are performed by the Georgia Department of Public Safety Motor Carrier Compliance Division. b.  Upon compliance with the requirements of this policy, the wrecker service may be included on the department wrecker list for the next three-year term. c.  Wrecker companies failing to meet compliance requirements will be advised in writing of the particulars of their non-compliance. Such companies shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity (not to exceed 30 days) to reach compliance. d.  In the event the department determines that a service should not be included on a rotation list due to information found in the criminal history or MVR, the police chief shall send a request to the city administrator for consideration by the mayor and council. The mayor and council will make the final determination whether the service will be excluded from the rotation list. (5)  Each wrecker service is subject to random inspections of pertinent documents, work sites, vehicles and equipment throughout the year. (6)  The principle office of the wrecker service, as listed with the Georgia Department of Public Safety Motor Carrier Compliance Division, must be in Dooly County. (7)  All wreckers, trucks and motor vehicles used to respond to calls by the police department, must be registered, tagged and titled in Dooly County to the wrecker service's address. (8)  All wreckers used by a wrecker service must be equipped at least in accordance with the stipulations set out in section (22) of this paragraph. (9)  A wrecker service must maintain a secure storage area for towed vehicles in Dooly County. a.  Liability insurance, which covers stored vehicles and contents, must be maintained on the storage lots. b.  The storage lot must be fenced with a minimum of six-foot fencing, lighted and equipped with a lock or enclosed building. c.  The wrecker service must provide for effective and efficient security for the lot. d.  The storage lot, located in Dooly County, must be utilized to store vehicles towed at the request of the police department until retrieved by the owner, owner's agent, or other lawfully authorized person. (10)  A wrecker service must maintain the minimum liability and property damage insurance prescribed by the Georgia Department of Public Safety and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMSCA), as applicable, on all vehicles used in its business as follows: a.  Intrastate (operating exclusively within the boundaries of Georgia): 1.  $ 100,000/person; 2.  $ 300,000/accident; 3.  $ 50,000 property; 4.  $ 20,000 Garage Keepers Legal Liability Insurance (GKLL) (liability insurance which covers stored vehicles and contents, must be maintained on each impound or storage lot(s) sufficient to cover the actual value of all stored vehicles towed or removed to such lot or storage facility). b.  Interstate (operating across state lines; state to state): 1.  $ 1,000,000 liability (Title 49, CFR, 387.7(a); 2.  MCS-90 (Proof of financial responsibility for motor carriers). (11)  A wrecker service must maintain regular business hours and a listed public business telephone number. (12)  All wrecker services will provide reasonable access to any towed vehicle seven days per week. (13)  A wrecker service must provide proof of ownership or a lease agreement for each towing vehicle used in its business. (14)  A wrecker service must maintain current proof of Georgia Intrastate Motor Carriers Registration (GIMCR) (for intrastate carriers) or unified carrier registration (UCR) (for interstate carriers) with the Georgia Department of Revenue or, the Georgia Department of Public Safety after July 1, 2014. Wrecker companies and drivers must comply with all state and federal safety rules and regulations. (15)  A wrecker service must maintain and provide to the department a list of all personnel operating wrecker equipment, as well as a current three-year certified motor vehicle report from the Georgia Department of Driver Services (DDS) on those drivers. (16)  Drivers must maintain a valid driver's license of the appropriate class and with the appropriate endorsements required to operate the wrecker service's equipment under Georgia law. Drivers must also meet all applicable driver qualification requirements, including medical qualification requirements, specific by both state and federal law. (17)  A wrecker service may maintain a maximum of two telephone numbers to be called for dispatching calls. (18)  If called and the wrecker service is unable to respond to a call, the wrecker service should notify the regional E911 immediately. The wrecker service is prohibited from calling its own back-up wrecker. It the wrecker service is unable to respond to the initial call, the department will request the next wrecker in rotation. (19)  Upon arriving at the scene, should the wrecker service require assistance, a request will made with the officer. The officer will request the additional wrecker, from the department approved wrecker rotation list. (20)  The department should survey the territories and attempt to locate wrecker services that can provide resources beyond normal services (larger wreckers and specialized equipment). If more than one service wishes to participate in providing the same type services, the police chief shall establish a list for those requests to be maintained within the contained guidelines. (21)  In order to be included on the department large wrecker rotation list, the wrecker must be mounted on a vehicle with a minimum gross vehicle weight capacity (GVWR) of 35,000 pounds and must have a minimum towing capacity of 80,000 pounds. (22)  The following items and equipment must be maintained on all wreckers and tow trucks: a.  Each vehicle must be permanently marked on both sides of the body or cab of the vehicle, in letters and figures in sharp color contrast to the background and legible from a distance of 50 feet during daylight hours while the vehicle is stationary, with: 1.  The name of the motor carrier (wrecker company), city of address, and telephone number, and 2.  The carrier's state or federal USDOT number. NOTE: For intrastate carriers (operating solely within Georgia) see the Georgia Department of Public Safety Rulebook, Chapter 1 (1-390.21(h)); for carriers operating in interstate (cross state lines) commerce, see Title 49,CFR 390.21. b.  Valid registration tag and revalidation decal; c.  Valid emergency light permit issued by DPS; d.  Flashing or revolving amber light with 360 degree visibility; e.  Battery jumper cables; f.  Fire Extinguisher; g.  Sweeping broom; h.  Flat shovel; i.  Container for debris; j.  Motorcycle straps (four), and k.  Tow away lamps (tail, stop and turn signal lights for vehicles being towed); and l.  Stopped vehicle warning devices (e.g. three bidirectional reflective triangles) (23)  Wrecker and towing companies who desire to be on the wrecker rotation list, who also engage in non-consensual towing functions specified in OCGA 44-1-13, which is regulated by the department of public safety, must possess a non-consensual towing (NCT) Permit issued by the department, and conform to all laws, rules, and regulations governing such transportation. Failure to do so will result in removal from the rotation list. (c)  Suspension procedures. (1)  The department may, in its discretion, suspend permanently or for a limited period of time a wrecker service from the wrecker rotation list. Reasons that a wrecker service may be removed from a wrecker rotation list include, but are not limited to the following: a.  Failure to comply with or violation of any of the provisions of this policy. b.  Repeated and substantiated complaints from customers regarding fraudulent or unethical business practices. c.  Poor and/or inefficient service which adversely affects the public safety or the duties of the investigating officer. d.  Unlawful, unsafe and/or criminal conduct. e.  Failure to respond to calls appropriately or in a timely manner. 1.  Upon being contacted a wrecker service may inform the E911 dispatcher that it is unable to respond due to lack of available services. However, failure to respond in this manner to three calls in one calendar month or repeated failures over several months will be considered as failure to respond appropriately and may result in suspension from the rotation list. This would not apply if the service advised the regional E911 office before being called of their inability to answer calls due to unforeseen circumstances. 2.  Upon informing an officer that a wrecker business will accept the call for service, a wrecker shall arrive in a timely manner. If a wrecker service indicates that it will accept the call but then fails to arrive, the service may be suspended from the rotation list after a single incident. f.  Upon arrest or indictment of any owner or operator for a felony charge. g.  For charging customers excessive or unreasonable rates. For purposes of this policy, any rates established or required by the Georgia Department of Public Safety or by a county or city for similar services shall be considered reasonable rates for that same area. h.  A history of criminal misconduct including a previous felony conviction or a series of misdemeanors indicating a pattern of immoral or indecent conduct. (2)  Upon determining that a reason may exist for suspension from the wrecker rotation list, the chief of police shall immediately notify the city administrator in writing with an explanation along with recommendations regarding suspension from the list. (3)  Upon receipt of such notice, the city administrator shall review this documentation, investigate as necessary, consult with city attorney and make recommendations regarding suspension to the mayor and council. (4)  Upon the mayor and council's determination and approval that the wrecker service be suspended from the wrecker rotation list, the city administrator will prepare the written notice of suspension. The wrecker service shall be immediately removed from the wrecker rotation list as directed by the mayor and council. (5)  The city shall serve the notice on the wrecker service via personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. Such certified notice shall be deemed received three days after mailing. (6)  The notice shall notify the wrecker service of the following: a.  The wrecker service has been suspended from any and all city wrecker rotation lists; b.  The wrecker service may, within 15 days of receipt of the suspension notification, request a review of the suspension, and c.  Such request must be made in writing and received by the city within the 15-day period specified. (7)  If the city does not receive a written request for a review within the 15-day period, any opportunity for a review shall be waived. (8)  Upon receipt of a timely, written review request, the city administrator shall schedule a review within 60 days before the mayor and council. The review may be in person at a meeting scheduled by the city administrator or a review of submitted documentation, evidence or written statements as determined by the city administrator. (9)  The mayor and council will issue a final decision upholding, modifying or reversing the initial decision. The decision of the mayor and council shall be final. The wrecker service is not entitled to any further review. Once a final decision is issued, there shall be no further review. (10)  A suspension from the department's wrecker rotation list may be temporary or permanent. A permanent suspension contemplates a period of at least three years, after which time the wrecker service may seek reconsideration for reinstatement. Whether to permit a suspended service to apply for inclusion on the rotation list is a determination which is completely within the discretion of the mayor and council. each request will be reviewed by the mayor and council on a case by case basis. (11)  Upon receipt of a timely, written reinstatement request, the mayor and council shall determine whether the review is an in-person meeting scheduled by the city administrator or the mayor and council's review of submitted documentation, evidence, or written statements. The review shall be scheduled within 30 days. (12)  The mayor and council shall issue a decision to uphold or modify the suspension or reinstate a business or business owner or operator to become eligible to apply for inclusion on the rotation list. Eligibility to apply for inclusion on the rotation list does not guarantee placement on the rotation list. The decision of the mayor and council shall be final and the wrecker service is not entitled to any further request for reinstatement or review until at least three (3) years following the last, final decision or order. (d)  Wrecker rotation procedures: police department rules: (1)  When a need for a wrecker arises, and the owner/operator of the vehicle has no preference as to what wrecker service is needed, the next wrecker service on the police department wrecker rotation list shall be used. (2)  If the owner/operator of a vehicle makes a reasonable request for a specific wrecker service, that wrecker service will be used. These requests must be made on an individual incident basis. Advance blanket requests are not practical for safety and efficiency, and therefore will not be honored. (3)  If the use of the wrecker service requested by the owner/operator would result in an excessive delay to the officer in the execution of their duties, the officer may exercise the option of using the next wrecker service on the police department wrecker rotation list. (4)  In an emergency situation, involving significant threat to life or property, the officer may utilize the closest equipment or services necessary to stabilize the situation. (5)  It is the responsibility of the wrecker driver to insure that all safety equipment, such as chains or cables and tow-away lighting, are used in accordance with state and federal laws, guidelines and regulations, as well as the manufacturer's requirements, and as designed for the safe and legal operation of recovery vehicles. (6)  No wrecker service is allowed to "run" a wrecker call for the purpose of soliciting business. (Ord. of 12-14-15(1)) 
Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building construction, ch. 14. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 78-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Consumer means any person, establishment, unit or space served on or through any water meter other than the customer in whose name the meter is listed or from whom payment may be required.     Customer means the owner of the property served by a utility service connection, or the tenant, lessee, renter, establishment or occupant of such property, or the person in or against whose name such connection for such property is listed on the books and records of the city, and who is responsible to the city for payment of bills incurred for such utility service furnished to such property and for use by such property of the public sewer system of the city, either or both.     Minimum monthly bill means the fixed minimum monthly payment required for a utility meter or connection calculated under the provisions of this chapter.     Structure includes the supplying of electricity or any other utility service prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.     Supply utility service means to supply any form of utility service, including electricity, in any manner to any structure within the city.     Temporary includes the supplying of electricity or any other utility service to any structure prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.     User means a customer of any utility service furnished by the city whose property also discharges sewage, wastes or water into the public sanitary sewer system of the city in any quantity.     Utility means water, sewer, gas and/or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof. Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Scope of chapter.     All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 78-3. - Service to comply with technical provisions.     Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable technical provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. (Code 1980, § 5-3-2; Ord. of 1-28-85, § 5) 
Sec. 78-4. - Rules, regulations.     The mayor and council shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city within or without the city and under the management of the city. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 78-5. - Service outside city.     In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any taps or connections outside the city limits until the premises involved have been inspected and approved by the city. Utility service shall not be provided to persons or groups outside the city limits except on the basis of a written contract approved by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 78-6. - Right of entry.     Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any reasonable time to all premises supplied with any utility service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility services from abusive use. 
Sec. 78-7. - Termination or refusal of service.     The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for the following reasons: (1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law. (2)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service. (3)  Nonpayment of bills. (4)  Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise. (5)  Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service. (6)  Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor. (7)  Vacancy of premises. (Ord. of 1-28-85, § 10) 
Sec. 78-8. - Liability of city for damage.     The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city. 
Sec. 78-9. - Application for service.     Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for such service to the mayor and council. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such utility service is desired. (Ord. of 1-28-85, § 2) 
Sec. 78-10. - Service not available to debtors.     The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except ad valorem taxes and special assessments. 
Sec. 78-11. - Permit.     Approval of the application for any utility service by the mayor and council shall be deemed permission for such service. 
Sec. 78-12. - Use assumed.     All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service, and the owner or occupant shall be charged for such service so long as such premises remain connected with the utility service. 
Sec. 78-13. - Use contrary to permit.     Any person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city who shall use such utility service for any purpose other than mentioned in such permit or who shall make any unauthorized changes in such service shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 78-14. - Damage of equipment, trespass.     It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. 
Sec. 78-15. - Unlawful supplying of service. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to supply any utility service, including electricity, to any structure on a temporary basis without proof being shown that a building permit has been issued by the city to the owner, builder or other person in control of such structure for such structure. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to supply any utility service, including electricity, to any structure on a permanent basis without proof being shown that a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city to the owner, builder or other person in control of such structure for such structure. (Ord. of 1-28-85, § 6) 
Sec. 78-16. - Interruption of service; notice.     The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as circumstances permit. 
Sec. 78-17. - Restricting use.     The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. 
Sec. 78-18. - Sale of service by customer.     It shall be unlawful for any person to resell any utility service obtained from the city to others except by special arrangement with the mayor and council. 
Sec. 78-19. - Service connections—Supervision of.     Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made under the supervision of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 78-20. - Same—Separate connections.     Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection. 
Sec. 78-21. - Same—Owner's consent.     Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or not, without the prior knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 78-22. - Unlawful use.     No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility service offered by the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service. 
Sec. 78-23. - Maintenance of equipment by consumer.     The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections, appliances and other apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service. 
Sec. 78-24. - Meters.     Meters for the measurement of utility services furnished by the city shall be furnished and installed by and shall remain the property of the city. (Code 1980, § 5-1-1) 
Secs. 78-25—78-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES 
Sec. 78-56. - Deposit—Required.     Along with the application for utility service, the applicant for service may be required to pay to the city a deposit as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1980, §§ 5-1-3, 5-3-2) 
Sec. 78-57. - Same—Refund.     Refunds of deposits made for utility service shall be made upon the termination of such utility service only after payment of all indebtedness to the city for such utility service. Application of deposit may be made in partial or total settlement of accounts when supply is cut off for nonpayment of a bill or for any infraction or violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city relative to utility services offered by the city. 
Sec. 78-58. - Determination of connection charges.     The charges and fees for connection to utility services furnished by the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 78-59. - Rates generally.     The monthly rate schedule for all users of any utility service furnished by the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Code 1980, §§ 5-1-2, 5-3-3; Ord. of 1-28-85, §§ 1, 3, 4) 
Sec. 78-60. - Combining meters.     Two or more meters, unless installed at one location, cannot be combined for billing purposes to take advantage of more favorable bulk rates. 
Sec. 78-61. - When payment due.     All bills for utility services furnished by the city shall be due and payable prior to midnight of the tenth day following the date of such bill; however, if such due date shall fall on a Sunday or a legal holiday observed by the city, such bill shall be due and payable by midnight of the following business day. (Code 1980, § 5-3-3; Ord. of 1-28-85, § 9) 
Sec. 78-62. - Late payment penalty.     A penalty will be added to the utility bill if such bill is not paid on or before the discount date as shown on the face of the bill. (Code 1980, § 5-3-3) 
Sec. 78-63. - Disconnection for nonpayment.     If bills for utility services are not paid when due, the city shall have the right to disconnect and discontinue all utility services furnished by the city to the consumer so in arrears. (Ord. of 1-28-85, § 10) 
Sec. 78-64. - Reconnection after disconnection.     If a utility service is disconnected for nonpayment of the bill, the consumer of the service shall have the right to have such service reconnected only upon the payment of the amount due and a reconnection fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. of 1-28-85, § 10) 
Sec. 78-65. - Voluntary discontinuance of service.     Consumers wishing to discontinue the use of any utility service shall give written notice thereof at the city hall. Failure to do so shall render the consumer liable for the payment of all bills until such notice has been given. (Code 1980, § 5-3-3; Ord. of 1-28-85, § 8) 
Secs. 78-66—78-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 78-96. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.     Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to a septic tank, grinder pump station or building sewer. The building drain shall extend to and end at a point five feet outside the inner face of the building wall, or end at the septic tank or grinder pump station.     Building sewer means the extension from the building drain, septic tank or grinder pump station to the public sewer or other place of disposal; also called house connection or service connection.     Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.     Commercial user or contributor means a premises or person who discharges industrial wastes that are similar to domestic wastes in nature, and do not exceed those parameters that define normal sewage, including volume.     Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting, expressly or implicitly, with the city in obtaining, having or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through such system. Such term shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer.     Easement means an acquired legal right for specific use of land owned by others.     Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated, and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.     Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement.     Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.     Grease or oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater.     Grinder pump station means a subsurface impervious tank with grinder pump, motor and piping, designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne waste, masticate the waste and pump it to the public sewer.     Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the board of commissioners and their duly appointed assistants.     Industrial user or contributor means an industry that discharges wastewaters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial or domestic wastes, and having a BOD of 200 mg/l or greater and/or a total suspended solids of 200 mg/l or greater.     Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.     Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water that leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings.     Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.     Normal sewage means wastewaters having characteristics of domestic wastewaters such that the BOD and suspended solids concentrations do not exceed 200 mg/l, total phosphorus is less than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is less than 20 mg/l, flow is less than 25,000 gpd, and no other pollutant or chemical constituents are present in amounts that will interfere with the treatment processes.     pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.     Pit privy means a shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with a hinged flytight seat and lid.     Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.     Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.     Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water that are not intentionally admitted.     Scavenger waste means putrid or offensive matter such as the contents of all privies, septic tanks or cesspools.     Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne waste.     Sewage means the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is "wastewater."     Sewage works (sewerage) means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.     Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.     Sewer surcharge means a charge for sewer service and treatment service for wastes having characteristics different from normal sewage and for which additional charges must be assessed in order to make compensation for additional expenses incurred.     Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste that in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period or duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration discharged during normal operation and adversely affects the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities.     Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.     Storm drain (storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sanitary sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.     Street means the right-of-way of streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and viaducts, and all other public highways.     Subsurface absorption field means a subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from a septic tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered.     Superintendent means the utilities superintendent or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.     Total solids means the sum of suspended matter, settleable matter and dissolved matter, both volatile and nonvolatile.     Total suspended solids (TSS) means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids which are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods.     Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.     Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.     Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.     Watercourse means a channel, either natural or artificial, in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.     All other words shall be construed as having the meaning defined in "Glossary—Water and Sewer Control Engineering," published by the Water Pollution Control Federation, Washington, D.C., or by their general usage if undefined. (Code 1980, § 5-2-1) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-97. - Discharge of chemicals and industrial wastes into sewer system.     Chemicals or chemical compounds and/or industrial wastes shall not be permitted to be discharged into the public sewer system or at the sewage treatment plant. (Code 1980, § 5-2-1) 
Sec. 78-98. - Right of entry by city for inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing.     The city administrator and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city administrator or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways of facilities for waste treatment. 
Sec. 78-99. - Observance of safety rules; indemnification of company against liability claims.     While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this article, the city administrator or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the city employees against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 78-232. 
Sec. 78-100. - Use by city of negotiated easement; purpose.     The city administrator and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
Sec. 78-101. - Violations of article; notice; correction deadline.     Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article and/or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and/or the state department of natural resources environmental protection division rules, regulations, and/or laws which apply, except division 3 of this article, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. (Code 1980, § 5-2-5) 
Sec. 78-102. - Penalty for failure to correct violation of article.     Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 78-101 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Code 1980, § 5-2-6) 
Sec. 78-103. - Liability of violators of article.     Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violations. 
Sec. 78-104. - Upgrades; property of city; destruction or removal punishable by state law.     Any electrical upgrade, grinder pump or upgrades/equipment, otherwise required by the city and paid for under the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Federal Grant C1306910-02, shall remain the property of the city. Destruction or removal of such upgrades shall be punishable under O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 78-105. - Damage to upgrades by negligence; billing of repair costs; failure to pay.     Damage to such upgrades resulting from negligence or lack of due care on the part of the property owner shall result in the cost of the repair being billed to the property owner. These costs shall be billed to the property owner as part of his monthly water bill. Failure to pay such bill will result in termination services pursuant to section 78-63. 
Sec. 78-106. - Hearings—Arbitration of differences or grievances between user and city.     Upon formal request by the sewer user, the mayor and council may hear any requested arbitration of differences or grievances between the sewer user and the city clerk on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 78-107. - Same—Appointment of hearing board.     If deemed necessary by the mayor and council, an independent hearing board may be appointed for arbitration purposes. Such a board shall consist of at least three persons, one of whom shall be a lawyer and the other two shall have technical knowledge of the provisions of this article. The cost of arbitration shall be equally divided by the city and the sewer user. 
Sec. 78-108. - Payment schedule for sewer system installation.     Upon written notification of a personal situation to the city administrator, the administrator may arrange with the customer a payment schedule with the city for the installation of the appropriate sewer system. 
Sec. 78-109. - Wetlands prohibition.     In order to permanently restrict development in wetlands identified by agencies of the U.S. government, connections and tap-ons to the sewer system for the city in identified wetlands are hereby prohibited. The city shall refuse to allow any connections or tap-ons to its sewer system in any such designated or identified wetland area. (Ord. of 2-14-94, § 1(5-2-9)) 
Secs. 78-110—78-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 
Sec. 78-131. - Deposit of excrement, garbage or other waste on private or public property.     It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Code 1980, § 5-2-2(a)) 
Sec. 78-132. - Discharge of polluted waters to storm sewers or other natural outlets.     It shall be unlawful to discharge to any storm sewer or natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any normal sewage, industrial wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. (Code 1980, § 5-2-2(b)) 
Sec. 78-133. - Construction or maintenance of private disposal system; city approval required.     It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, pit privy, privy vault, cesspool or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage where public sewers are reasonably available without the expressed written approval of the city. (Code 1980, § 5-2-2(c)) 
Sec. 78-134. - Tie into system required of all property owners.     All property owners will be required to tie into the sewer system. Those property owners who are not covered under such grant or who were covered under the grant but did not elect to tie into the system during the construction will be required to do so at the property owner's expense. (Code 1980, § 5-2-2(d)) 
Sec. 78-135. - Installation and connection of toilet facilities required for those not covered by EPA grant.     All owners of properties situated within the city or any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now or shall be located a public sanitary sewer of the city are hereby required at their expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of written notice from the city administrator to the property owner requiring such property owner to make connection thereto, utilizing the method of connection described in the written notice to be one of the following, provided that such public sewer shall be within 100 feet of the property line: (1)  For properties served by conventional gravity sewers eight inches and larger in diameter, any septic tank, pit privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facility shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, have any permanent bottom barrier broken, and be filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt within 90 days of notification to do so by the city or other county or state agency having jurisdiction over such matters and construct a building sewer connecting to the building drain and public sewer. (2)  For properties served by small diameter gravity lines less than eight inches in diameter, use of septic tanks will be required. Existing septic tanks shall be cleaned and inspected, repaired or replaced as required, disconnected from the subsurface absorption field, and a building sewer constructed between the outlet of the septic tank and public sewer at the property owner's expense. When connection is made to the public sewer, the property owner shall transfer ownership of the septic tank and building sewer to the city, at which time the city will become responsible for the maintenance and periodic cleaning of the septic tank and building sewer. (3)  For properties served by low pressure sewers, any septic tank, pit privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facility shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, have any permanent bottom barrier broken, and be filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt at the owner's expense. A grinder pump station shall be installed, furnished by the city and paid for by the property owner, and a building sewer shall be constructed between the grinder pump station and the public sewer. An electric wiring connection shall be made between the grinder pump station and the property owner's electrical system. The property owner shall be responsible for payment of all electrical usage costs. At the time when connection is made to the public sewer, the property owner shall transfer ownership of the grinder pump station and building sewer to the city, at which time the city will become responsible for maintenance of the grinder pump station and building sewer. When it is determined by the city that the grinder pump is no longer necessary and the pump can be removed, the property owner's sewage system will be connected to the public sewer at no cost to the property owner. (4)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to have a licensed plumber or septic tank service contact the city on all problems associated with the septic tanks and outlet drains. The cost of the plumber or septic tank service shall be borne by the responsible party. The city shall only be responsible for problems indicated inside the septic tank and/or outlet drain from the septic tank to the public sewer. 
Sec. 78-136. - Connection of toilet facilities to public sewer by those covered by EPA grant; notice.     The owner of all houses, buildings or properties completed and ready to be used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, included as part of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Grant Number C1306910-02, situated within the city or any area within the jurisdiction of the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there shall be located a public sanitary sewer of the city shall hereby be required, at the expense of the city, to connect his toilet facilities directly to the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of written notice from the city administrator to the property owner requiring such property owner to make connection thereto, utilizing the method of connection described in the written notice, to be either a conventional gravity sewer or a low pressure sewer system as specified under such grant. Where the city determines that an existing septic tank is not in compliance with the current standards, such septic tank will be replaced at the city's expense. 
Sec. 78-137. - Connection required of property owners within 100 feet of sewer.     The owner of any house, building or property completed and ready to be used for human occupancy prior to the availability of a public sewer, and whose property line falls within 100 feet of any public sewer may elect to connect to the public sewer, upon its availability, at the property owner's expense. All connections must be made in accordance with the methods of connection described in this article. Such property owners will be required to pay the monthly sewer rate regardless of whether or not the property owner elects to connect to public sewerage. 
Secs. 78-138—78-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
Sec. 78-161. - Connection to private system where public sewer unavailable.     Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under provisions of section 78-134, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage system complying with the provisions of this article. No permit shall be issued for any private disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. (Code 1980, § 5-2-3(a)) 
Sec. 78-162. - Permit—Required; application; fees.     Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system such as a septic tank with subsurface absorption field, pit privy, privy vault or cesspool, including those for a single-family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city administrator. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city administrator. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application for permit is filed. (Code 1980, § 5-2-3(b)) 
Sec. 78-163. - Same—Effective upon inspection and approval by city.     A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city's authorized representatives shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction; and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be within two working days of the receipt of notice by the city administrator. (Code 1980, § 5-2-3(c)) 
Sec. 78-164. - Type, capacities, location and layout; compliance with state and local agencies.     The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources, county health department or other local or state agencies having jurisdiction. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (Code 1980, § 5-2-3(d)) 
Sec. 78-165. - Operation and maintenance by owner.     The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. (Code 1980, § 5-2-3(f)) 
Sec. 78-166. - Connection to public sewer required upon availability.     At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 78-164, a connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with section 78-134. (Code 1980, § 5-2-3(e)) 
Sec. 78-167. - Division provisions not to nullify additional requirements.     No statement contained in this division shall be construed to nullify any additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate state or county regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such matters. (Code 1980, § 5-2-3(g)) 
Sec. 78-168. - Discharge of septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow.     The discharge of septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain, ditch or well penetrating water-bearing formations is prohibited. 
Secs. 78-169—78-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
Sec. 78-191. - Permit—Required.     No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
Sec. 78-192. - Same—Classes.     There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (1)  Residential and commercial service; and (2)  Service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the city. When the application is filed, a permit and inspection fee for the building sewer shall be paid to the city, as provided in the schedule of fees and charges and on file with the city clerk. 
Sec. 78-193. - Costs and expenses for installation and connection to be borne by property owner; indemnification of city.     All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer for properties served by conventional gravity sewers, of the septic tank and building sewer for properties served by small diameter gravity lines, and of the grinder pump station and building sewer for properties served by low pressure sewers, which are not included as part of the sanitary sewer system as approved under U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Grant Number C130691-02, shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by installation of the building sewer, septic tank, or grinder pump station. 
Sec. 78-194. - Separate, independent sewer for each building.     A separate and independent sewer shall be provided for every building. Where one building stands to the rear of another on a single lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the city may grant permission for the building sewer from the front building to be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, upon a showing by the applicant that it is not feasible that the two buildings so connected will ultimately be on separate building lots. 
Sec. 78-195. - Use of old building sewers.     Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the city to meet all of the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 78-196. - Size, slope, alignment, materials and methods.     The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.C.E. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 "Design and Construction of Sanitary Sewers" shall apply. 
Sec. 78-197. - Elevation standards.     Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the lowest level (first floor or basement as applicable). No building sewer shall be made parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads (automobiles, etc.) that may be superimposed. The building sewer shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. The building sewer shall be constructed to such point as directed by the city. 
Sec. 78-198. - Connections of surface runoff or groundwater to building sewers.     No person shall maintain or make a connection of swimming pools, roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer and/or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the city's sanitary sewer system. 
Sec. 78-199. - Inspection of sewer prior to covering or connection.     Before any underground portions are covered, the applicant of the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to public sewer. The connection shall be made to the public sewer by an authorized representative of the city and only after inspection. 
Sec. 78-200. - Guarding of excavations; restoration of public property.     All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
Sec. 78-201. - Record to be kept of new connections.     The city shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth and direction of all new sewer connections, including such landmarks as may be necessary to make an adequate description. 
Sec. 78-202. - Sewer service charge.     A sewer service charge will be placed on each user of the public sewers, which will be based on the volume of water used each month. 
Sec. 78-203. - Work to meet OSHA requirements.     All work pertaining to this division shall meet pertinent occupational safety and health administration (OSHA) requirements. 
Sec. 78-204. - Service to unincorporated areas.     The city may provide service to adjacent unincorporated areas provided an appropriate intermunicipal agreement is executed between the city and the county. 
Secs. 78-205—78-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 
Sec. 78-226. - Prohibited use of sanitary sewer.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage into the sanitary sewer. (Code 1980, § 5-2-4(a)) 
Sec. 78-227. - Prohibited waters or wastes.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following waters or wastes to any public sewers: (1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other explosive liquid, solid or gas. (2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the treatment plant. (3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0 containing heavy concentrations of salts or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. (4)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction in the flow of sewage or other interference to the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
Sec. 78-228. - Prohibited discharges.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such waste can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows, and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: (1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 104 degrees Fahrenheit or 40 degrees Celsius. (2)  Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils whether emulsified or not in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 0 to 65 degrees Celsius. (3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-quarters horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. (4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. (5)  Any waters or wastes containing concentrations of heavy metals in excess of the following: Chromium (III) 0.5 mg/l Lead 0.3 mg/l Tin 0.5 mg/l Copper 0.5 mg/l Nickel 0.5 mg/l Cyanide 0.5 mg/l Cadmium 0.3 mg/l  A combination of such metals shall not exceed 0.5 mg/l in the effluent, or which, when blended with other wastes in the sewers, will have a combined concentration in excess of 0.1 mg/l when it reaches the treatment plant, section 78-229 notwithstanding, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials. Notwithstanding the preceding upper limits, the state environmental protection division and the city may require pretreatment of such waste discharges in accordance with section 78-229 to the lowest practical and reasonable levels to comply with appropriate state or federal regulatory agency requirements, either for the treatment facility influent or effluent, or if otherwise found necessary to provide satisfactory and acceptable treatment of all wastewater. (6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage to meet requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters. (7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. (8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH outside of the range of 6.0 to 9.0. (9)  Materials which exert or cause: a.  Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or dissolved solids such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. b.  Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. c.  The admission into the public sewers of any waters having a five-day BOD greater than 200 mg/l; containing more than 200 mg/l of suspended solids; containing more than 700 mg/l of chemical oxygen demand; or having an average daily flow of five percent of the average daily sewage flow to the plant will be subject to the review and approval of the city. Where necessary in the opinion of the city in consultation with the city engineer, the owner shall provide at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to 200 mg/l and the suspended solids to 200 mg/l; reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided; or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. Plans and specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city engineer. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained in writing. d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs. (10)  Waters or wastes containing substances that are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of state or federal agencies having a jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (11)  The discharge of oxygen demanding substances and suspended solids in excess of 300 mg/l to the sewer system is prohibited unless agreed to by separate contract with the discharger. (12)  Notwithstanding subsections (1)—(11) of this section, the substances prohibited and concentrations specified in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit to be issued by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, shall supplement and take precedence over limits specified in this section. (Code 1980, § 5-2-4(f), (g)) 
Sec. 78-229. - Wastes having deleterious or hazardous effects; remedies by city. (a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 72-228, which in the judgment of the city or the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: (1)  Reject the wastes; (2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition with discharge to the public sewers; (3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or (4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of section 78-234. (b)  If pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is required, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, and the city, subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (Code 1980, § 5-2-4(h)) 
Sec. 78-230. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors; maintenance and records.     Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. The owner of the interceptor shall be required to maintain and clean the interceptor and keep records of work performed. The records shall be posted in a conspicuous place so as to be readily available to city personnel. (Code 1980, § 5-2-4(k)) 
Sec. 78-231. - Preliminary treatment for flow equalizing facilities; maintenance.     Where preliminary treatment for flow equalizing facilities is provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (Code 1980, § 5-2-4(m)) 
Sec. 78-232. - Installation of control manhole; location and maintenance. (a)  It shall be required by the city that the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes install a suitable control manhole through which all industrial plant effluent shall flow. When deemed necessary, the city may require additional meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. (b)  Such manhole shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Code 1980, § 5-2-4(n)) 
Sec. 78-233. - Standards for measurements, tests and analyses of wastewater.     All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (Code 1980, § 5-2-4(p)) 
Sec. 78-234. - Agreements between city and industrial concerns; effect of division.     No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment by the industrial concern. 
Sec. 78-235. - Uncontaminated cooling or condensing water; discharger requires permit.     Uncontaminated cooling or condensing water shall be discharged to the storm drain system. The owner of such facility discharging cooling or condensing water shall be responsible for obtaining an NPDES permit from the state environmental protection division. 
Sec. 78-236. - Industries to comply with CFR requirements.     Industries shall comply with all the requirements of 40 CFR 403. 
Sec. 78-237. - Connections of sanitary sewers to storm sewers.     No sanitary sewer services nor sanitary sewer extensions shall be connected to storm sewer systems. 
Secs. 78-238—78-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION 
Sec. 78-261. - Short title.     The article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-262. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2, in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-263. - Definitions.     For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:     City means the City of Vienna.     Covered account means: (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, utility account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonable foreseeable risk to customers or to safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks.     Credit means the right granted by creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payments or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore.     Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies.     Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor.     Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted, using identifying information of another person without authority.     Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative or association.     Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name, and date of birth.     Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.     Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-264. - Findings. (a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2, due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. (b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, gas, property taxes and other covered accounts. (c)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. (d)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. (e)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: (1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; (2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; (3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-265. - Process of establishing a covered account. (a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer: driver's license, rental agreement and another utility account connection of services. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. (b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-266. - Access to covered account information. (a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. (b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by city administrator on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. (c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city administrator and the password changed immediately. (d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city administrator and the city attorney. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-267. - Credit card payments. (a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. (b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. (c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-268. - Sources and types of red flags.     All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: (1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. (2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. (3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. (4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with establishing patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time. e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. (5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-269. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. (a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate: (1)  Contact the customer; (2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or b.  Close the account; (3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; (4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; (5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or (6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate: (1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; (2)  Deny the application for the new account; (3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or (4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-270. - Updating the program.     The mayor and city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: (1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; (2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; (3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; (4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and (5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-271. - Program administration.     The city administrator is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The deputy clerk is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the deputy clerk to address changing identify theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the mayor and city council for consideration by the council. (1)  The deputy clerk will report to the city administrator at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; b.  Service provider arrangements; c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. (2)  The deputy clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Sec. 78-272. - Outside service providers.     In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city administrator shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. of 7-27-09(3)) 
Chapter 82 - ZONING[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building construction, ch. 14. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 82-1. - Purpose.     The mayor and council, under the authority of the Georgia Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the city hereby ordains and enacts into law the articles and sections of this chapter. (Code 1980, § 6-4-2) 
Sec. 82-2. - Jurisdiction.     The provisions of this chapter shall govern all land, buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1980, § 6-4-3) 
Sec. 82-3. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Accessory use or building means a use or building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building.     Bed and breakfast means a structure occupied by its owners who shall be the operators, wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast are provided to guests, who limit their stay to not more than seven consecutive nights, for compensation. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of an owner and an owner shall live in the structure when the bed and breakfast operation is in operation.     Board of appeals means the board of zoning appeals appointed by the mayor and council to hear various appeals and other matters.     Building includes the word "structure" and means any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.     Building, front line of, means the line of that face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.     Centerline of streets means a line surveyed and monumented as such; or if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside lines of right-of-way of the street.     City means the mayor and council as formally constituted by charter.     Coverage means that percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the building area.     Dwelling means a building designed or used for permanent living quarters for one or more families or individuals.     Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for or used as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other in a complete dwelling unit.     Dwelling, one-family means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.     Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other.     Dwelling unit means one or more rooms with kitchen facilities designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes.     Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family.     Feedlot means any parcel of land upon which the mechanical or hand feeding of five or more livestock animals per acre is performed for a period exceeding 30 days.     Home occupation means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that: (1)  No more than one person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in that occupation; (2)  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use of residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; (3)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of any home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; (4)  Home occupations conducted in any accessory building shall not occupy an area larger than 25 percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling; (5)  No traffic shall be generated by any home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of any home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; and (6)  No equipment or process shall be used in any home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interferences, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interferences in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.     Junkyard means any accumulation or storage of junked vehicles, machinery, equipment or appliances, vehicle or machinery parts, rags, litter or other debris in excess of 65 square feet in area. A junked vehicle is hereby defined as any vehicle that does not have the current year's state inspection sticker.     Loft dwellings means residential dwelling units, rented and/or owner occupied, located on any floor elevated above the ground or street level floor within the existing commercial buildings located within the community commercial district.     Lot includes the word "plot" or "parcel" and means a parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more buildings, including accessory buildings or uses incidental to them, and including those open spaces as are required by this chapter.     Lot, corner, means a parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets.     Lot, depth of, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.     Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot.     Lot of record means a lot that is duly recorded in the office of the county clerk.     Lot, width of, means the mean width measured at right angles to its depth.     Map or zoning map means the official zoning map of the city.     Mobile home means a detached residential dwelling unit built upon a chassis and designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations. A mobile home shall be larger than eight feet wide and 32 feet long.     Mobile home, double-wide, means a detached residential dwelling consisting of two or more separate units built upon chassis and designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for the joinder of two or more of said units, together with incidental unpacking and assembly operations. A double-wide mobile home shall be larger than eight feet wide and 32 feet long.     Mobile home park means any five-acre parcel of land under single ownership designed to accommodate mobile homes to be used for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building structure or other facilities used by the occupants of mobile homes on the property.     Modular structures means any structures prefabricated in part or whole and moved to the site for assembly. A modular type structure with attached wheels is considered a mobile home.     Personal care home means any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage, and as may further defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-12.     Planning commission means the planning commission appointed by the mayor and council to review planning and zoning matters.     Sign means a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit.     Sign, off-premises, means a sign other than an on-premises sign.     Sign, on-premises, means a sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises. On-premises signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry to advertise products and the like located away from the premises.     Sign, public or semipublic directional, off-premises, means a sign that directs attention to a public or semipublic activity, such as a school, church, fraternal organization or the like. These signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area.     Special exception use means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to surrounding uses, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. These uses may be permitted in any zoning districts as special exception uses if specific provision for these conditional uses is made in this chapter.     Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards and signs.     Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet and a length not exceeding 32 feet. A travel trailer is not considered a mobile home.     Used or occupied, means as applied to any land or buildings, shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed to be used or occupied."     Yard means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except as permitted by this chapter.     Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot.     Yard, rear, means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the principal building projected to the side lines of the lot.     Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the lot with a principal building located between the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard.     Zoning official means the mayor and council, who is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. (Code 1980, § 6-4-4; Ord. of 9-28-98, § 1; Ord. of 10-8-12(2); Ord. of 9-23-13(2)) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-4. - Area, yard and height requirements.     This chart presents in abbreviated form the minimum size, width and height requirements for each designated district. Zoning District Typical Type Use Lot Area in Square Feet Lot Width in Feet Minimum Front Yard (Feet) Minimum Side Yard (Feet) Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) Maximum Height of Building (Feet) R-1 single-family residential Single-family homes 10,000 75 35 12 two or more stories 10 one story 35 50 R-1MH single-family and mobile home residential Single-family and mobile homes  7,000 75 35 10 two or more stories 8 one story 25 50 R-2 multifamily residential Multifamily dwellings  7,500 60 35 7 one story 2 for additional stories 25 — C-1 community commercial Neighborhood sales and services 10,000 75 35 None required except 30 from residences 25 50 C-2 general commercial Major commercial activities 10,000 75 35 None required except 30 from residences 25 50 I-1 light industrial Limited industrial activities 10,000 75 35 25 from all lots 50 from residences 25 — I-2 general industrial All industrial activities 10,000 75 35 None required except 50 from residences 25 — A-R agricultural-residential Single-family mobile homes (agricultural activities) 10,000 75 35 10 one story 12 two or more stories 35 —  (Code 1980, § 6-4-5) 
Secs. 82-5—82-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
Sec. 82-36. - Zoning districts.     For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into districts to be designated as follows: (1)  R-1 single-family residential district; (2)  R-1MH single-family and mobile home residential district; (3)  R-2 multifamily residential district; (4)  C-1 community commercial district; (5)  C-2 general commercial district; (6)  I-1 light industrial district; (7)  I-2 general industrial district; and (8)  A-R agricultural-residential district. (Code 1980, § 6-4-11) 
Sec. 82-37. - Zoning map.     The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown in the map entitled "The Zoning Map of the City of Vienna, Georgia." This map is hereby made a part of this chapter and shall be available for public inspection at the city hall, together with applicable amendments. As evidence of its authenticity, the zoning map and amendments shall be certified by the city clerk. (Code 1980, § 6-4-12) 
Sec. 82-38. - Interpretation of district boundaries.     Unless otherwise specified, district boundary lines shall be property or lot lines, the centerlines of streets or those lines extended, a line midway between the main tracks of a railroad, a line lying in the center of a stream or drainage way, or the city limits. Those lines drawn or appearing on these lines are to be considered thereon. Where district boundary lines parallel street rights-of-way or other discernible topographic features, the exact distance may be scaled from the map. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time the ordinance from which this chapter was derived was adopted, the board of appeals may permit, as a conditional use, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. (Code 1980, § 6-4-13) 
Secs. 82-39—82-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
Sec. 82-71. - Use.     No building, structure or land shall be erected and no existing building or structure or any part thereof shall be reconstructed or moved, nor shall any land, structure or building be used or altered except in conformity with the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located. (Code 1980, § 6-4-21) 
Sec. 82-72. - Height and density. (a)  No building or structure shall be erected, constructed or altered to: (1)  Exceed the height limits; (2)  House a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family; or (3)  Have narrower or smaller front or side yards; than are required in this chapter. (b)  Height limits of this chapter shall not apply to structures not intended for human occupancy such as church spires, flagpoles, chimneys, monuments, radio or television towers or aerials, water towers or similar structures. The height limits shall apply to signs and billboards. (Code 1980, § 6-4-22) 
Sec. 82-73. - Lot area and reduction of lot size.     No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots in the same ownership as of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or size of yards or lot area per family or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained, except as otherwise specified in this chapter. (Code 1980, § 6-4-23) 
Sec. 82-74. - Space provisions.     No part of a yard or other open space or any part of the off-street parking or loading space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of the yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required for another building. (Code 1980, § 6-4-24) 
Sec. 82-75. - Public street frontage.     No building shall be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least 25 feet on a public street. (Code 1980, § 6-4-25) 
Sec. 82-76. - Corner lots.     The side yard setback requirement for corner lots shall be the same as the front yard requirements for adjoining lots on the same street. (Code 1980, § 6-4-26) 
Sec. 82-77. - One principal building on a lot.     Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings shall hereafter be erected on any one lot. (Code 1980, § 6-4-27) 
Sec. 82-78. - Vision clearance.     No sign, hedge or other obstacle to vision between the height of two and ten feet shall be placed within 20 feet of any street intersection right-of-way lines. (Code 1980, § 6-4-28) 
Sec. 82-79. - Front yard setback of dwellings.     The front yard setback requirement of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of any lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setbacks of the adjoining buildings, but in no case shall the setback be less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way upon which that lot fronts. (Code 1980, § 6-4-29) 
Sec. 82-80. - Nonconforming uses.     A nonconforming use shall include any building, structure or use of land existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived but not in conformity with its use regulations and provisions. Any nonconforming uses may be continued but shall not be: (1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; (2)  Extended or enlarged except in conformity with this chapter; (3)  Reestablished after discontinuance for one year; and (4)  In order for a nonconforming use to be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage has exceeded 50 percent of its assessed value for city tax purposes, the nonconforming use shall be presented to the board of appeals by the zoning official, whereupon a hearing shall be set to determine whether there is cause to grant a variance. (Code 1980, § 6-4-30) 
Sec. 82-81. - Off-street automobile parking.     At least one off-street parking space not less than nine feet in width and 20 feet in length with vehicular access to a public street shall hereafter be provided for: (1)  Each dwelling unit on a residential lot; (2)  Each mobile home space in a developed mobile home park; (3)  Each 250 square feet of total floor area for a retail commercial establishment, if on-street parking is not adequate; (4)  Each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift for any industrial activity; (5)  Each two employees at a gasoline service station, plus one space for each service bay; and (6)  One and one-half automobile spaces shall be provided for each unit in a multifamily dwelling. (Code 1980, § 6-4-31) 
Sec. 82-82. - Off-street loading space.     At least one off-street loading space not less than ten feet in width and 25 feet in length with vehicular access to a public street shall hereafter be provided for each retail business and for industrial use in addition to the required number of off-street parking spaces. (Code 1980, § 6-4-32) 
Sec. 82-83. - Site and development plan.     For all zoning approvals except for single-family and agricultural uses, a site and development plan shall be required. Three copies of the plan shall be submitted to the zoning officer with sufficient information to determine its compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The plan should include such things as parking, landscaping, utilities, proposed uses, drainage, signs, etc. (Code 1980, § 6-4-33) 
Sec. 82-84. - Signs, numbers and surface areas.     For the purpose of this chapter the use and location of signs will be controlled in the following manner: (1)  In residential districts no more than one on-site sign will be allowed for nonresidential use. This sign shall not exceed four square feet in area and shall not be illuminated in any manner. The sign shall not be located within any required yard setback area unless attached to the building. (2)  In commercial, industrial and agricultural districts, on-site signs will be allowed. These signs when illuminated will be arranged so as not to reflect light into residential areas. Such on-site signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, shall not exceed 20 feet in height, shall have only one ground pole per lot, and all other signs shall required a variance. All signs, except in the downtown area, shall have a minimum of a 15-foot setback unless attached to a building. (3)  All signs shall be designed to be harmonious with the surrounding structures and uses. (4)  These signs are expressly prohibited in all districts: Illuminated sequential, flashing, blinking, or oscillating signs, whether permanent or portable, with the exception of signs providing time and temperature. (5)  The total sign area of all signage on any one lot shall not exceed 200 square feet. A double-faced sign shall be considered a single sign. However, signage designed for pedestrian viewing only, such as under canopy signage or small directional signs, shall not be included in calculating the maximum allowable sign area per lot. (6)  Roof signs shall not be permitted. (7)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to interstate signs and shall not be in conflict with chapter 14, article IV. of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Vienna. (Code 1980, § 6-4-34; Ord. of 9-22-03, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 82-85. - Mobile home parks.     In mobile home parks, the following standards shall apply: (1)  Each trailer space shall provide a minimum area of 3,000 square feet. (2)  No trailer shall be nearer than 15 feet from any neighboring trailer or interior road or nearer than 30 feet from an adjacent property line. (3)  A buffer in accordance with section 82-88 shall be required. (4)  One refuse collection station shall be provided for each 20 families or fraction thereof. (5)  Water and sanitary facilities shall be connected to each trailer, as required by the state health department. (6)  A recreation area shall be developed for each park at a ratio of 20,000 square feet per five-acre park. (7)  Paved interior roadways shall be provided with adequate access to each trailer space and public street. Interior roadways shall have a pavement of not less than 16 feet. (Code 1980, § 6-4-35) 
Sec. 82-86. - Utility facilities.     Utility, water and sanitary facilities shall be connected to each new dwelling, building and/or structure as required by the state health department. (Code 1980, § 6-4-36) 
Sec. 82-87. - Permanent foundations required.     All dwelling units, including mobile homes, shall be required to have permanent foundations and underpinned. (Code 1980, § 6-4-37) 
Sec. 82-88. - Buffering and fencing.     For all uses where a site and development plan is required under section 82-83, a buffer area shall be required. The buffer shall be in a five-foot-wide area and shall be at least eight feet in height. The buffer may be in the form of walls, fences or landscaping. The buffer may be required along the front, side and rear yard lines if necessary. (Code 1980, § 6-4-38) 
Secs. 82-89—82-99. - Reserved. 
Sec. 82-100. - Loft dwellings; restrictions.     Loft dwellings shall be subject to the following restrictions: (1)  All window treatments visible from the exterior of the commercial building must be off-white colors, with no signs, drawings, or photographs incorporated therein. No articles shall hang from the outside of the windows or be placed above or lateral to the windows such as, but not limited to, awnings or canopies, unless design and color are approved by the Vienna Historic Preservation Commission as to those loft dwellings within the designated historic district. (2)  No exterior television, radio or other electronic receiving device antennae or satellite reception dishes or discs shall be permitted unless such device is less than 36 inches in diameter, located on the roof in such a way as is not visible from any public street; cable connectors shall be permitted and located at the rear of the exterior of the commercial establishment. (3)  Clothing shall not be permitted to hang for any purpose on the exterior of the subject building. (4)  All window air conditioning and/or heating units shall not be visible from any public street. (5)  No recreation, entertainment, public gathering, or placement of furniture shall be allowed on the sidewalks along the exterior of buildings where loft dwellings are permitted. (6)  Parking. Each residential unit of the loft dwelling shall have its own off-street parking with direct access to a public street. (Ord. of 9-23-13(2)) 
Sec. 82-101. - Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities; restrictions and conditions.     Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities shall be allowed in all districts as a special exception use and shall be subject to the following restrictions and conditions: (1)  Area of use may not exceed 100 acres on-site with no aggregation of solar collection panels on adjacent properties which exceeds 100 acres; and (2)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities may consist only of solar collection systems in residential districts and may be used for on-site purposes only; and (3)  Solar energy production facilities shall adhere to the setback and height requirements of the district in which they are located. Ground-mounted systems shall be fenced with "Danger - High Voltage" warning type signs attached to said fencing at intervals of not more than 100 feet; and (4)  Solar energy production facilities shall be visually screened from abutting residential properties through any one or combination of the following: (1) plantings; (2) existing vegetation; or (3) fencing not to exceed eight feet in height; and (5)  The manufacturers' or installers' identification, the facility owner's name and contact information, and the appropriate warning signage shall be posted on or near the panels in a clearly visible manner and on the required fencing; and (6)  All electrical interconnection and distribution lines within the project boundary, except for power lines that leave the project or are within the substation shall be underground unless otherwise determined by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna because of severe environmental constraints; and (7)  Lighting of the solar energy production facility and accessory structures shall be limited to the minimum lumens required for access or necessary repair and replacement and said lighting shall not be directed at residential structures on abutting property existing as of the date of construction of said facility; and (8)  Solar panels shall be designed and installed to prohibit sun reflection in such a manner to impede vehicular traffic and any habitable portion of an adjacent or abutting structure. Lighting of the solar energy production facility and accessory structures shall be limited to the minimum lumens required for access or necessary repair and replacement and said lighting shall not be directed in such fashion as to impede vehicular traffic; and (9)  Professional engineered drawings that clearly illustrate the design of the solar energy production facility shall be submitted as part of the special exception use application package. Manufacturers' drawings for solar collection systems in residential systems may be submitted in lieu of professional engineered drawings. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Vienna may apply aesthetic consideration when making recommendation to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna for approval or disapproval; and (10)  Any solar energy production facility that has not been in use for its original purpose for a period of 180 days as determined by records of the production facility owner, property owner, or City of Vienna shall be deemed to be abandoned. The solar energy production facility owner and/or the property owner shall have 90 days to remove the abandoned solar energy system and any appurtenant structures or to reactivate the solar energy system; and (11)  The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Vienna may, in its discretion, recommend to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna to waive any of the above-listed conditions or may recommend that additional and appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance be prescribed in order to mitigate the impact of the use to surrounding uses and to otherwise protect public health, safety and general welfare. Violation of each such condition and safeguard, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this section. Each day such violation occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation of this section. (12)  Ground-mounted accessory solar panels. a.  Ground-mounted accessory solar panels shall only be permitted in the rear and side yard in the commercial zoned districts, and in the rear yard only of residential zoned districts. b.  Ground-mounted solar panels located on the ground or attached to a framework located on the ground shall not exceed eight feet in height above the ground. c.  Ground-mounted solar panels shall meet the setback as required for in the districts in which they are located. d.  The total coverage of a lot with ground-mounted solar panels cannot exceed 20 percent lot coverage. e.  Ground-mounted systems shall be screened from any adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used for residential purposes. The screen shall consist of plant materials which provide a visual screen. In lieu of a planting screen, a decorative fence meeting requirements of the zoning ordinance may be used. f.  The manufacturers' or installers' identification and appropriate warning signage shall be posted on or near the panels in a clearly visible manner. (13)  Roof-mounted solar panels. a.  Roof-mounted solar panels shall be located only on rear or side-facing roofs as viewed from any adjacent street. b.  A roof-mounted system may be mounted on a principal building or accessory building. c.  A roof-mounted system, whether mounted on the principal building or accessory building, shall be subject to the maximum height regulations specified for building within the underlying zoning district. d.  In no instance shall any part of the roof-mounted system extend beyond the edge of the roof. e.  The panels shall not be located within three feet of any peak, eave or valley of the roof to maintain pathways of accessibility. f.  The manufacturers' or installers' identification and appropriate warning signage shall be posted on or near the panels in a clearly visible manner. (14)  Historic district overlay. Solar energy production facilities are allowed in the historic district overlay; are subject to the above regulations and the Vienna Historic District Guidelines. A certificate of appropriateness from the Vienna Historic Preservation Commission is required prior to permitting. (Ord. of 9-23-13(3); Ord. of 8-25-14) 
Secs. 82-102—82-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICTS 
Sec. 82-121. - Intent of article.     This article is established to ensure that each district is reserved primarily for its intended use, including public and semi-public uses, which are necessary to serve the needs of the district. It is the intent of this article to promote the stability and character of land development, and to promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the community sketch plan. (Code 1980, § 6-4-51) 
Sec. 82-122. - R-1 single-family residential district. (a)  Generally. The R-1 district is composed chiefly of existing low-density single-family residential areas of the city and vacant or open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to encourage similar and complementary type residential development together with associated recreational, religious and educational facilities. (b)  Permitted uses. (1)  Single-family dwellings, except trailers or mobile homes. (2)  Agriculture, excluding the commercial raising of livestock and poultry. (3)  Public municipal buildings, structures and land uses. (4)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. (c)  Special exception uses. Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated below may be permitted in the R-1MH single-family and mobile home residential district. The board may approve or deny any application as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described in this section. (1)  Day nurseries or kindergartens. (2)  Public utility substations, if essential for the service to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located. (3)  Churches. (4)  Public and private schools. (5)  Recreational developments, including but not limited to private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. (6)  Duplexes. (7)  Home occupations. (8)  Double-wide mobile homes may be permitted subject to specified conditions contained both within this section and the building code and other licensed requirements of the city. (9)  Personal care homes. (10)  Bed and breakfast operations. (11)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities. (d)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: (1)  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. (2)  Lot width: 75 feet. (3)  Front yard: 35 feet. (4)  Rear yard: 35 feet. (5)  Side yards: Ten feet, for one-story dwellings; 12 feet, for two or more stories. (6)  Maximum height: 50 feet. (7)  Maximum number of stories: Principal building, three stories. (Code 1980, § 6-4-52; Ord. of 10-9-89; Ord. of 9-28-98, § 2; Ord. of 10-8-12(2); Ord. of 8-25-14) 
Sec. 82-123. - R-1MH single-family and mobile home residential district. (a)  Generally. The R-1MH district is composed chiefly of existing low-density single-family residential areas of the city, and vacant or open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to permit the continuation of existing mixed residential and mobile home development, together with associated recreational, religious and educational facilities in areas where this pattern is already established. (b)  Permitted uses. (1)  Single-family and mobile home dwellings. (2)  Agriculture, excluding the commercial raising of livestock and poultry. (3)  Public municipal buildings, structures and land uses. (4)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. (c)  Special exception uses. Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated below may be permitted in the R-1MH single-family and mobile home residential district. The board may approve or deny any applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described in this section. (1)  Day nurseries or kindergartens. (2)  Public utility substations, if essential for the service to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located. (3)  Churches. (4)  Public and private schools. (5)  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. (6)  Duplexes. (7)  Home occupations. (8)  Personal care homes. (9)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities. (d)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: (1)  Lot area: 7,500 square feet. (2)  Lot width: 75 feet. (3)  Front yard: 35 feet. (4)  Rear yard: 25 feet. (5)  Side yards: eight feet for one-story dwellings; ten feet for two or more stories. (6)  Maximum height: 50 feet. (7)  Maximum number of stories: Principal building, three stories. (Code 1980, § 6-4-53; Ord. of 9-28-98, § 3; Ord. of 8-25-14) 
Sec. 82-124. - R-2 multifamily residential district. (a)  Generally. It is the intent of the R-2 district to provide for a multifamily type of residential development, allowing higher density development, while maintaining an environment similar to that found in the R-1 district. (b)  Permitted uses. (1)  Any permitted use in the R-1 district. (2)  Multifamily dwellings. (3)  Boardinghouses or roominghouses. (4)  Fraternal organizations and clubs, not operated for a profit. (c)  Special exception uses. Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated below may be permitted in the R-2 multifamily residential district. The board may approve or deny any applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described in this section. (1)  Day nurseries or kindergartens. (2)  Public utility substations, if essential for the service to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located. (3)  Churches. (4)  Public and private schools. (5)  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. (6)  Hospitals, clinics and nursing homes. (7)  Professional offices such as medical, dental, legal, etc. (8)  Home occupations. (9)  Personal care homes. (10)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities. (d)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: (1)  Lot area: 7,500 square feet. (2)  Lot width: 60 feet. (3)  Front yard: 35 feet. (4)  Rear yard: 25 feet. (5)  Side yards: Seven feet for single-story buildings; except when adjacent to a single-family residential district, it shall be ten feet and two feet for each additional story. (6)  Maximum height: Principal building, 50 feet; except that for each one foot that the building or a portion of it sits back beyond the required front, side and rear yards, one foot may be added to the height limit of any building or portion thereof; however, no building shall exceed a height of 125 feet. (7)  Maximum density: Six dwelling units per/acre. (Code 1980, § 6-4-54; Ord. of 9-28-98, § 4; Ord. of 8-25-14) 
Sec. 82-125. - C-1 community commercial district. (a)  Generally. The C-1 district is established to provide locations for new commercial activities and to protect existing commercial facilities that serve local neighborhood residences. The regulations for this district are designed to promote low-intensity commercial activities that are compatible with neighborhood areas. (b)  Permitted uses. (1)  Single-family dwellings when attached to a commercial use. (2)  Retail sales for neighborhood needs such as drugstores, small grocery stores, fruit and vegetable stands, gift shops, florists, etc. (3)  Eating places such as coffee shops, restaurants and take-out establishments. (4)  Service establishments such as barbershops and beauty shops, laundries, day nurseries, etc. (5)  Professional offices such as medical, dental, legal, accounting, etc. (6)  Public municipal buildings, structures or land uses. (7)  Other uses that are similar or compatible to the permitted uses. (8)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. (c)  Special exception uses. Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated below may be permitted in the C-1 community commercial district. The board may approve or deny any applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described in this section. (1)  Public utility substations, if essential for the service to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located. (2)  Churches. (3)  Public and private schools. (4)  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. (5)  Hospitals, clinics and nursing homes. (6)  Clubs and fraternal organizations not operating for profit. (7)  Personal care homes. (8)  Loft dwellings. (9)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities. (d)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: (1)  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. (2)  Lot width: 75 feet. (3)  Front yard: 35 feet. (4)  Rear yard: 25 feet. (5)  Side yards: 30 feet from residential districts; none required within district between buildings. (6)  Maximum height: 50 feet. (Code 1980, § 6-4-55; Ord. of 9-28-98, § 5; Ord. of 9-23-13(2)) 
Sec. 82-126. - C-2 general commercial district. (a)  Generally. The C-2 district is intended to provide for major commercial activities in the downtown area and along selected portions of the major highways and arterial streets. The regulations for this district are designed to encourage commercial developments to serve the general public that is compatible with the character of the downtown area and the major highways of the city. (b)  Permitted uses. (1)  Any permitted or special exception use in the C-1 district. (2)  Automobile sales and storage. (3)  Bowling alley. (4)  Bus terminal. (5)  Commercial recreation. (6)  Drive-in theater. (7)  Equipment sales and storage. (8)  Filling stations and automobile repair shops. (9)  Hotel, motel and tourist campground. (10)  Lumberyard or building material sales. (11)  Mobile home or travel trailer sales. (12)  Radio or television broadcasting station. (13)  Restaurant and cafe shop. (14)  Supermarket. (15)  Truck stop. (16)  Undertaking establishment. (17)  Other uses similar or compatible to the permitted uses. (18)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. (c)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, except in the downtown area, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: (1)  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. (2)  Lot width: 75 feet. (3)  Front yard: 35 feet. (4)  Rear yard: 25 feet. (5)  Side yards: 30 feet from a residential district; none required within district between buildings. (6)  Maximum height: 50 feet. (d)  Special exception uses. (1)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities. (Code 1980, § 6-4-56; Ord. of 8-25-14) 
Sec. 82-127. - I-1 light industrial district. (a)  Generally. The I-1 light industrial district is intended for the development of limited manufacturing, processing and storage facilities that, when appropriately located, are an asset to the development of the community. (b)  Permitted uses. (1)  Manufacturing or packaging of materials. (2)  Warehousing and storage. (3)  Processing of raw or semi-finished materials. (4)  The sale of goods or products produced on the site. (5)  Public municipal buildings, structures or land uses. (6)  Other uses similar or compatible to the permitted uses. (7)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. (c)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, except in the downtown area, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: (1)  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. (2)  Lot width: 75 feet. (3)  Front yard: 35 feet. (4)  Rear yard: 25 feet from all lots except 50 feet from residential districts. (5)  Side yards: 50 feet from other districts; none within district between buildings. (d)  Performance standards. Industrial activities shall be in conformance with standards established by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. Industrial activities shall emit no obnoxious, toxic or corrosive dust, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases that can cause any damage to human health, to animals or vegetation, or to other forms of property, or that can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission; discharge no smoke of a consistency that will restrict the passage of sunlight beyond the lot boundaries; produce no heat or glare perceptible beyond that injurious to human beings, animals or vegetation (electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emissions shall not be of any intensity that interferes with the use of any other property); discharge of any untreated potentially dangerous effluent from plant operations into local surface or subsurface drainage courses. (e)  Special exception uses. (1)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities. (Code 1980, § 6-4-57; Ord. of 8-25-14) 
Sec. 82-128. - I-2 general industrial district. (a)  Generally. The I-2 general industrial district is intended for the development of major or heavy manufacturing, processing and storage facilities that, when appropriately located, are an asset to the development of the community. Because of the intensity of the uses in this district, the location and development will be coordinated with the mayor and council. (b)  Permitted uses. Within the I-2 general industrial district the following type uses are permitted: (1)  Any permitted use in the I-1 district. (2)  Auto wrecking yards, junkyards, iron or rag storage. (3)  Cement, lime, fertilizer, gypsum mixing or manufacturing of Plaster of Paris or other similar products. (4)  Distillation of bones. (5)  Paper or pulp manufacturing. (6)  Refining or mixing of petroleum or its products such as asphalt. (7)  Rubber manufacturing or treatment. (8)  Stockyards or slaughter of animals. (9)  Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides. (10)  Wholesale storage of gasoline. (11)  Wholesale storage of liquefied petroleum gases. (c)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: (1)  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. (2)  Lot width: 75 feet. (3)  Front yard: 35 feet. (4)  Rear yard: 25 feet. (5)  Side yards: 50 feet from a residential district and 50 feet from other districts; none required within the district between buildings. (d)  Performance standards. Industrial activities shall be in conformance with standards established by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. Industrial activities shall emit no obnoxious, toxic or corrosive dust, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases that can cause any damage to human health, to animals or vegetation, or to other forms of property, or that can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission; discharge no smoke of a consistency that will restrict the passage of sunlight beyond the property line; emit any obnoxious odor perceptible beyond the lot boundaries; produce no heat or glare perceptible beyond that injurious to human beings, animals or vegetation (electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emissions shall not be of any intensity that interferes with the use of any other property); discharge of any untreated potentially dangerous effluent from plant operations into local surface or subsurface drainage courses. (e)  Special exception uses. (1)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities. (Code 1980, § 6-4-58; Ord. of 8-25-14) 
Sec. 82-129. - A-R agricultural-residential district. (a)  Generally. The A-R district is composed of agricultural uses where some development has been occurring or is likely to occur. The regulations for the district are designed to encourage a compatible relationship between agricultural and limited residential development while protecting existing agricultural activities. (b)  Permitted uses. (1)  Single-family dwellings. (2)  Agricultural pursuits, including field crop farming, truck gardening and forestry. (3)  Public municipal buildings, structures or land uses. (4)  Other uses similar or compatible to the permitted uses. (5)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. (c)  Special exception uses. Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated below may be permitted in the A-R agricultural-residential district. The board may approve or deny any applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described in this section. (1)  Mobile home dwellings. (2)  Day nurseries or kindergartens. (3)  Public utility substations, if essential for the service to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located. (4)  Churches. (5)  Public and private schools. (6)  Recreational developments, including but not limited to, private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. (7)  Cemeteries. (8)  Hospitals, clinics and nursing homes. (9)  Clubs and fraternal organizations not operating for profit. (10)  Duplexes. (11)  Mobile home rental parks. (12)  Home occupations. (13)  Personal care homes. (14)  Photovoltaic solar energy production facilities. (d)  Bulk regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: (1)  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. (2)  Lot width: 75 feet. (3)  Front yard: 35 feet. (4)  Rear yard: 35 feet. (5)  Side yards: Ten feet, for one-story dwellings; 12 feet for two or more stories. (Code 1980, § 6-4-59; Ord. of 9-28-98, § 6; Ord. of 9-23-13(3)) 
Secs. 82-130—82-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 82-161. - Zoning officer.     A zoning officer designated by the mayor and council shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the zoning officer shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible for those violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. (Code 1980, § 6-4-71) 
Sec. 82-162. - Zoning permits required.     No building, mobile home or other structure shall be erected, moved or structurally expanded without a permit therefor, reviewed by the zoning officer. No building permit shall be reviewed by the zoning officer except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, unless he receives a written order from the board of zoning appeals in the form of an administrative review, special exception or variance as provided by this chapter. (Code 1980, § 6-4-72) 
Sec. 82-163. - Construction and use to be as provided in zoning plans.     Zoning permits issued on the basis of plans and applications reviewed by the zoning officer authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in those approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided by this chapter. (Code 1980, § 6-4-73) 
Sec. 82-164. - Planning commission; duties. (a)  A planning commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna, Georgia, according to the guidelines of the Georgia General Enabling Act of 1957, as amended. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing before making recommendation(s) to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna with respect to: (1)  The adoption of a zoning ordinance; (2)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance; (3)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which re-zones property from one classification to another; (4)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance by municipal local government which zones property to be annexed into the municipality; and (5)  The grant of a permit relating to a special use of property. (b)  Upon concluding the public hearing, the planning commission shall vote and submit a written report to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna. This written report shall recommend approval, denial, or recommend other appropriate alternatives for the consideration by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna. A recommendation of the planning commission is not binding and is subject to confirmation by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Vienna. All hearings conducted by the planning commission shall be in accordance with the Georgia Zoning Procedures Act, as amended. (c)  The planning commission shall adopt and publish its policies and procedures with respect to conditions governing applications and the procedures to be followed. (Code 1980, § 6-4-74; Ord. of 9-23-13(1)) Cross reference— Planning commission, § 58-71 et seq. 
Sec. 82-165. - The board of zoning appeals; powers and duties.     A board of appeals appointed by the mayor and council in accordance with the Georgia General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, shall have the following powers and duties: (1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning officer in the enforcement of this chapter. (2)  Reserved. (3)  Variances; conditions governing applicants; procedures. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases any variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the board of appeals unless: a.  A written application for a variance is submitted, together with such fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, demonstrating that: 1.  Special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and that are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same districts; 2.  Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter; 3.  Special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; and 4.  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. b.  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. c.  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney. d.  The board of appeals shall make findings that the requirements of this subsection have been met by the applicant for a variance. e.  The board of appeals shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. f.  The board of appeals shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. g.  In granting any variance, the board of appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of any conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under this chapter. h.  Under no circumstances shall the board of appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in that district. (4)  Board has powers of administrative official on appeals; reversing decision of zoning officer. a.  In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board of appeals may, so long as that action is in conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. b.  The concurring vote of a majority of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in the application of this chapter. (5)  Appeals from the board of zoning appeals. Any person or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by a decision of the board of appeals may seek review by a court of record of any decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the state and particularly by the General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended. (6)  Relationship of zoning administrator, board of appeals, city and courts on matters of appeal. a.  It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the zoning officer, and that those questions shall be presented to the board of zoning appeals only on appeal from the decision of the zoning officer, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of zoning appeals shall be to the courts as provided by law and particularly by the Georgia Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended. b.  It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of the mayor and council in connection with this chapter shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding those questions shall be as stated in this section and this chapter. Under this chapter, the mayor and council shall have only the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed rezonings and text amendments or the repeal of this chapter as provided by law, of establishing a schedule of fees and charges, and of appointing members to the planning commission and board of appeals. (Code 1980, § 6-4-75; Ord. of 8-9-89; Ord. of 9-23-13(1)) Cross reference— Board of zoning appeals, § 58-31 et seq. 
Sec. 82-166. - Amendments. (a)  Procedure. This chapter, including the zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. (b)  Initiation of amendments. Applications to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text or proposals to amend the zoning map. An application may be initiated by the planning commission or by any person who owns property within the zoning jurisdiction of the city. Unless initiated by the mayor and council or the planning commission, all applications for map amendments must be submitted by the owner of any property or the authorized agent of the owner for whom the rezoning is requested. (c)  Applications for amendments. Each request for amendment of this chapter or zoning map initiated by any person who owns property within the zoning jurisdiction of the city shall be submitted on a form provided by the city, together with a fee and deposit according to a schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for advertising cost. A separate request must be filed for each parcel or separate ownership for which a zoning amendment is requested. (Code 1980, § 6-4-76; Ord. of 8-9-89) 
Secs. 82-167—82-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
Sec. 82-201. - Provisions of chapter declared to be minimum requirements.     In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. (Code 1980, § 6-4-91) 
Sec. 82-202. - Conflict with other laws.     When the regulations of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any statute or other legal document, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. When the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of that statute shall govern. (Code 1980, § 6-4-92) 
Sec. 82-203. - Penalties for violation. (a)  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-11, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day any violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains any violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. (c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking any other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Code 1980, § 6-4-93) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1980 CODE This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1980 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 1980 Code Section Section  this Code 1-1-1—1-1-4 1-1—1-4 1-1-5 1-11 1-1-6 1-8 1-1-7 1-10 2-1-1 2-31 2-1-11—2-1-17 2-32—2-38 ch. 2-2 30-1 2-2-3 30-2 2-2-6 30-3 2-3-1(a)— 2-3-1(c) 26-1—26-3 2-4-1, 2-4-2 2-72, 2-73 2-4-3 2-1 2-4-4 2-106 2-5-1—2-5-3 70-1—70-3 2-5-11—2-5-13 70-36—70-38 2-5-41 70-141 2-5-42 70-144 2-5-43 70-146 3-1-1—3-1-3 46-1—46-3 3-2-1 38-36 3-2-4 38-1 3-2-5, 3-2-6 38-3, 38-4 3-2-22 38-2 3-3-1 22-31 3-3-2(a) 22-83 3-3-3 22-56—22-58 3-3-4 22-32 4-1-1—4-1-6 66-36—66-41 4-1-7—4-1-9 66-1—66-3 4-3-1(1)— 4-3-1(7) 18-2—18-8 4-3-1(intro. ¶) 18-1 4-3-2 18-9 5-1-1 78-24 5-1-2 78-59 5-1-3 78-56 5-2-1 78-96, 78-97 5-2-2(a)— 5-2-2(d) 78-131—78-134 5-2-3(a)— 5-2-3(d) 78-161—78-164 5-2-3(e) 78-166 5-2-3(f) 78-165 5-2-3(g) 78-167 5-2-4(a) 78-226 5-2-4(f), (g) 78-228 5-2-4(h) 78-229 5-2-4(k) 78-230 5-2-4(m), 5-2-4(n) 78-231, 78-232 5-2-4(p) 78-233 5-2-5, 5-2-6 78-101, 78-102 5-3-2 78-3 78-56 5-3-3 78-59 78-61, 78-62 78-65 6-1-1—6-1-4 58-71—58-74 6-1-11—6-1-14 58-106—58-109 6-1-21 58-141—58-144 6-2-1—6-2-6 14-31 6-4-2—6-4-5 82-1—82-4 6-4-11—6-4-13 82-36—82-38 6-4-21—6-4-38 82-71—82-88 6-4-51—6-4-59 82-121—82-129 6-4-71—6-4-76 82-161—82-166 6-4-91—6-4-93 82-201—82-203 6-5-2, 6-5-3 34-136, 34-137 6-5-4(a), 6-5-4(b) 34-171, 34-172 6-5-4(c) 34-174 6-5-6(a), 6-5-6(b) 34-146, 34-147 6-5-7(a) 34-138 6-5-7(c), 6-5-7(d) 34-139, 34-140 6-5-8 34-145 7-2-1—7-2-4 6-36—6-39 7-2-4(1) 6-1 7-2-5—7-2-9 6-40—6-44 7-2-21—7-2-24 6-76—6-79 7-2-24(a) 6-1 7-2-25—7-2-29 6-80—6-84 7-2-41 6-1 7-2-42—7-2-55 6-116—6-129 7-2-56(a) 6-130 7-2-56(b) 70-143 7-2-57—7-2-67 6-131—6-141 7-2-81 6-1 6-171 7-2-82—7-2-95 6-172—6-185 7-2-96(a) 6-186 7-2-97—7-2-105 6-187—6-195 7-6-2 74-66 8-1-1, 8-1-2 74-1, 74-2 8-1-4, 8-1-5 74-3, 74-4 8-2-1 74-5 8-2-2(a) 74-6 8-2-3 74-8 8-4-1 74-66 8-4-2 74-67 74-70 74-75 9-1-1 50-1 9-1-3(a), 9-1-3(b) 34-101, 34-102 9-1-4—9-1-6 50-2—50-4 9-1-7 62-38 9-1-8 6-2 9-2-1 34-31, 34-32 9-2-2 34-34, 34-35 9-2-4 34-33 9-3-1 10-1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1980 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede 1980, but which were never included in the 1980 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. Ord. Number  Date Section  Section this Code Ord. of  4- 8-74 6-3 Ord. of  5-24-76 1, 2 62-1, 62-2 Ord. of  5-24-82 I(1)—I(5) 14-106—14-110 II 14-111 III(1)—III(10) 14-136—14-145 Ord. of  9-12-83 1, 2 70-71, 70-72 Res. of  9-12-83 1 38-37 Res. of  8-13-84 6-4 Ord. of  1-28-85 1 78-59 2 78-9 3, 4 78-59 5 78-3 6 78-15 8 78-65 9 78-61 10 78-7 78-63, 78-64 Ord. of  3-28-88 2—4 10-31—10-33 7 10-34 Ord. of  9-26-88 1 6-116 Ord. of  8- 9-89 82-165, 82-166 Ord. of 10- 9-89 82-122 Ord. of  3-12-90 1 30-2 Ord. of  6-10-91 1, 2 14-67, 14-68 3 14-68 5, 6 14-70, 14-71 Ord. of  2-14-94 1(5-2-9) 78-109 Ord. of 10-24-94 1—6 70-106—70-111 Ord. of 12-21-95 1(7-1-1)—1(7-1-14) 70-181—70-194 Ord. of 9-28-98 1 82-3 2       Added 82-122(c)(9) 3       Added 82-123(c)(8) 4       Added 82-124(c)(9) 5       Added 82-125(c)(7) 6       Added 82-129(c)(13) Ord. of 10-11-99 1—6       Added 34-221—34-226 Ord. of  6-10-02       Added 2-125—2-136 Ord. of  7- 8-02       Added 18-10, 18-11 Ord. of  9-22-03 1 82-84(2), (4) 2       Added 82-84(5)—(7) Ord. of 11-24-03 I—VIII       Added 58-171—58-317 Ord. of  5-23-05 1—5       Added 58-331—58-335 Ord. of  3-13-06       Dltd 10-1—10-34       Added 10-1—10-38 Ord. of 11-13-06       Added 15-126—15-155 Ord. of  3-26-07       Added 34-251—34-284 Ord. of 10-23-07       Added 74-9 Ord. of 12-24-07       Added 70-201—70-213 Ord. of  1-14-08       Added 15-31—15-39 Ord. of  7-28-08 1, 2       Added 70-195 67  7-28-08 arts. I—III       Added 15-66—15-92 arts. V—XI       Added 15-93—15-98 Ord. of  4-13-09 1       Added 34-300—34-306 Ord. of  7-27-09(1)       Dltd 42-31—42-115       Added 42-31—42-181 Ord. of  7-27-09(2)       Added 50-5 Ord. of  7-27-09(3)       Added 78-261—78-272 Ord. of 12-20-10       Added 34-401—34-405 Ord. of  3-28-11       Added 74-101 Ord. of 10-8-12(1)       Dltd 15-31—15-39       Added 15-31—15-38 Ord. of 10-8-12(2) 82-3       Added 82-122(c)(10) Ord. of  7-22-13       Added Ch. 52, §§ 52-1, 52-2, 52-6—52-18, 52-26 Ord. of  9-23-13(1) 58-74 82-164       Dltd 82-165(2) Ord. of  9-23-13(2) 82-3       Added 82-100       Added 82-125(c)(8) Ord. of  9-23-13(3)       Added 82-101       Added 82-129(c)(14) Ord. of  6- 9-14(1)       Dltd 10-1—10-38       Added 10-1—10-46 Ord. of  6- 9-14(2)       Added 18-31—18-49 Ord. of  7-25-14(1)       Added 34-431—34-438 Ord. of  7-25-14(2)       Added 42-201—42-208 Ord. of  7-28-14(1)       Dltd 34-136—34-199       Added 34-136—34-145 Ord. of  7-28-14(2)       Added 42-230—42-242 Ord. of  8-25-14 82-101       Added 82-122(c)(11)       Added 82-123(c)(9)       Added 82-124(c)(10)       Added 82-125(c)(9)       Added 82-126(d)(1)       Added 82-127(e)(1)       Added 82-128(e)(1) Res. of  4-27-15 Exh. A 58-332 Ord. of 12-12-11(1) 6-182 Ord. of 12-12-11(2) 6-41, 6-81, 6-125 Ord. of  4-14-14(1) 1       Added 26-5 Ord. of  4-14-14(2) 1       Added 26-4 Ord. of  2- 8-16(1)       Added 34-480—34-493 Ord. of  2- 8-16(2)       Added 34-461—34-469 Ord. of  4-25-16(1) 34-32(b)(11)       Added 34-32(14), (15) Ord. of  4-25-16(2) 10-5 Ord. of  4-25-16(3)       Added 14-10—14-12 Ord. of 12-14-15(1)       Added 74-131—74-133 Ord. of  3-27-17(1) 6-3 Ord. of  3-27-17(2) 6-182 Ord. of  4-24-17(1)       Added Ch. 60, 60-1—60-18  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. O.C.G.A. Section Section  this Code 1-1-3 1-4 1-1-7 1-3 1-3-1—1-3-3 1-2 1-3-3 34-138 34-401 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-105 70-187 3-1-2 6-1 3-3-20 6-4 3-4-130 70-143 3-5-80 Ch. 70, Art. V 70-141 3-6-60 70-142 4-8-20—4-8-29       10-41 5-4-1 42-141 8-2-1 et seq. 14-31 8-2-3 Ch. 14, Art. III 8-2-25 14-31 12-2-8 34-139 12-4-72 34-138 12-5-20 34-137 12-5-23(a)(5) 34-140 12-5-30(f) 34-137 34-139 12-5-440 et seq. 34-137 ch. 12-7 34-137 12-7-1 et seq. 34-139 12-7-6 34-138 12-7-6(b) 34-138, 34-139 12-7-6(c) 34-139 12-7-7.1 34-138 12-7-7(e) 34-141 12-7-7(f)(1) 34-140 12-7-8(a) 34-137 34-141 12-7-17(9), (10) 34-140 12-7-19(b)(1) 34-143 12-7-19(b)(4) 34-143 12-7-20 34-140 34-143 ch. 13 52-11 15-21-93 1-11 15-21-100 1-11 15-21-112 1-11 15-23 1-11 tit. 16 34-259 16-7-40 Ch. 62, Art. II 16-8-5 78-104 16-10-6 2-130 16-11-43 66-3 16-13-21 et seq. 52-11 17-6-1 1-11 17-6-70 et seq. 1-11 17-10-3 1-11 17-10-3(e) 1-11 21-3-1 et seq. Ch. 30 30-1 21-3-91 30-2 25-3-1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 25-9-6 15-92 tit.31, ch. 19 10-10 31-3-5.1 14-34 31-3-5.2 34-401 31-7-12 82-3 32-4-42(6) 15-66 32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 66 32-4-92 15-66 Ch. 66 33-3-5 70-106 70-110 33-8-4 70-109, 70-110 33-8-8.1 Ch. 70, Art. IV 70-109 33-8-8.2 Ch. 70, Art. IV 70-110 34-9-1 et seq. 38-37 36-1-20 15-66 36-1-20(a) 42-31 36-18-1 34-138 36-30-10 Ch. 66 36-34-2 15-66 36-34-3 Ch. 66 36-39-1 et seq. Ch. 66 36-39-7 Ch. 78, Art. III 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 22 38-3-70 et seq. Ch. 22 40-6-1— 40-6-395 74-1 40-6-14 Ch. 34, Art. III 40-6-370 74-1 40-6-372 74-1 40-8-71(c) Ch. 34, Art. III 41-1-1 34-31 41-2-5 34-35 tit. 43 70-188 44-10.1—44-10.5 58-199 44-1-13 74-132 45-11-1 1-10 tit. 46, ch. 3 70-187 46-7-15 70-187 47-17-60 et seq. 1-11 48-2-40 70-193 48-2-41 70-206 48-2-43 70-206 48-5-350 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. II 48-5-355, 48-5-356 70-187 48-6-93 70-71 70-187 48-6-93(d) 70-72 48-13-7 70-184 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) 70-181 48-13-50 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. VII 70-201 48-13-51(a)(4) 70-213 tit. 50, ch. 18, art. 4 70-191 95A-913 et seq. 14-109  