THE CODE OF THE CITY OF WRENS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
> 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
William L. Hadden 
Mayor 
____________ 
Erskine Lane 
Wayne Favors 
Jack Templeton 
Johnny Rabun 
Melvin Farmer 
City Council 
____________ 
Arty Thrift 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Chris Dube 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Janee Miller 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2002 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council on or before November 30, 2015. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2002 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Julie Lovelace, Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Arty Thrift, City Administrator, and Chris Dube, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wrens, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wrens, Georgia. 2016. 
CITY OF WRENS  ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING  A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF WRENS 
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-06-01 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF WRENS, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WRENS, GEORGIA, AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY AUTHORITY OF THE SAME, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the City of Wrens, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 40, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 30, 2015, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine and sentence of imprisonment and/or probation not to exceed the maximum punishment as set out by Georgia law under O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 30, 2015 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. The following ordinances are not in any way revised by this recodification and shall remain in full force and effect: Unified Development Ordinance and the City Personnel Policies. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective the next business day following the adoption of this Ordinance. 
Read, passed and adopted this 7th day of June, 2016. 
Mayor and City Council of Wrens, Jefferson County, Georgia. 



Attest: 

  
First Reading: 4-5-2015 
Second Reading: 6-7-2016 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this part is the city Charter, being 1901 Ga. Laws (Act No. 369), page 722. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. Other additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the Act and enacting clause have been deleted. Any provisions regarding the severability, repealer, jurat, affidavit or notice of publication, publication date, or the adoption or effective date of the ordinance or Act have been omitted. Each section of the original Act began with the prefatory language "[b]e it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, [t]hat" or "[b]e it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that." At the editor's discretion, this prefatory language has been omitted from this printing. Pursuant to 1951 Ga. Laws (Act No. 453), page 3278, § 1, the name of the municipal corporation has been changed from "Town of Wrens" to the "City of Wrens" and references to "town" have been changed to "city." In addition, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the terms "recorder" or "police court" have been stricken wherever they appear and the term "municipal court" is inserted in lieu thereof. The amendments to the city Charter enacted by 1953 Ga. Laws (Act No. 25), p. 2093, are not included as that Act provided for an appraisal of property for the year following passage of the Act (1954), and as such is deemed not of a permanent nature. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation, corporate name and powers. 
The City of Wrens, in the County of Jefferson, be, and the same is, hereby incorporated as a city under the corporate name of the City of Wrens. The municipal government of said city shall be vested in a mayor and five councilmen, who are hereby created a body corporate, under the name and style of the City of Wrens, and by that name they shall have perpetual succession, with powers to make such ordinances, by-laws and resolutions for municipal purposes as may be deemed proper, and with power in and by said corporate name to sue and be sued, to contract and be contracted with, to have and hold property, real and personal, and to do all acts relating to its corporate capacity. 
Sec. 2. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the said City of Wrens shall begin at the trestle of the Augusta Southern Railroad Co. over Brushy Creek, where the present corner of the city limits established by the Act approved August 22, 1905, now stand, and running in a straight line in a northerly direction up to where the ditch crosses the Quaker road between S. M. McNair's residence and the place of Mrs. Mollie Young; thence in a straight continuous line till this line intersects with the public road running from S. M. McNair's to Hobbs' Mill; thence in an easterly direction in a straight line to the corner between the Wasdeb place and the land now owned by W. J. Wren; thence in a straight line from the last-named point in a southerly direction to where a road intersects Wade Street at Aquilla Stapleton's house, now marked by an iron stake; thence in a straight line in a southwesterly direction, intersecting the Wrens and Zebina road at a stake halfway between the homes of Emma Thomas and Robert Pughlesly; thence in a southwesterly direction in a straight line to the water tank of the Savannah and Atlanta Railway Company, which is located about 200 yards east of the depot of that company; thence in a straight line to a stake at the corner of D. N. Oliphant and Howard and Radford's lands; thence in a straight line running north 45 west for a distance of 800 yards to a stake; thence from said stake in a straight line to the starting point at the Brushy Creek trestle. 
(Ga. Laws 1905 (Act No. 545), p. 1238, § 1; Ga. Laws 1917 (Act No. 69), p. 973, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Mayor and council; election. 
(a)  The city councilmen elected pursuant to Code Section 21-3-61 of the O.C.G.A. in November, 1989, whose terms normally expire on December 31, 1993, shall remain in office until December 31, 1993, and until such city councilmen's respective successors are elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 1993, and every four years thereafter, the successors to such city councilmen shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until such city councilmen's respective successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following such city councilmen's election. 
(b)  The term of office of the city councilman elected pursuant to Code Section 21-3-61 of the O.C.G.A. in November, 1990, which office was held by Spence C. Norton on January 1, 1991, which term normally expires on December 31, 1993, shall not expire until December 31, 1995, and until such city councilman's successor is elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 1995, and every four years thereafter, the successor to such city councilman shall be elected and shall serve for a term of office of four years and until such city councilman's successor is elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following such city councilman's election. 
(c)  The city councilman elected pursuant to Code Section 21-3-61 of the O.C.G.A. in November, 1990, which office was held by Robert C. Stephens on January 1, 1991, whose term normally expires on December 31, 1993, shall remain in office until December 31, 1993, and until such city councilman's successor is elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 1993, and every four years thereafter, the successor to such city councilman shall be elected and shall serve for a term of office of four years and until such city councilman's successor is elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following such city councilman's election. 
(d)  The mayor and city councilman elected pursuant to Code Section 21-3-61 of the O.C.G.A. in November, 1991, whose terms normally expire on December 31, 1995, shall remain in office until December 31, 1995, and until such mayor's and city councilman's respective successors are elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 1995, and every four years thereafter, the successors to such mayor and city councilman shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following such mayor's and city councilman's election. 
(Ga. Laws 1951 (Act No. 453), p. 3278, § 2; Ga. Laws 1952 (Act No. 617), p. 2324, § 2; Ga. Laws 1992 (Act No. 600), p. 4520, § 1) 
Sec. 4. - Qualifications. 
The mayor and councilmen of said city must have resided within the corporate limits of said city for at least 12 months immediately preceding the date of their election. 
Sec. 5. - Place of elections. 
All elections for mayor and council of the said City of Wrens after the passage of this Act shall be held at the city hall in the said City of Wrens, and the mayor and council shall at all times have the authority to locate the city hall in the said City of Wrens for this purpose and for all other purposes. 
(Ga. Laws 1951 (Act No. 453), p. 3278, § 3) 
Sec. 6. - Official oath. 
The mayor and councilmen of said city, before entering upon the discharge of their official duties, shall subscribe to the following oath, which may be administered by any person authorized to administer oaths in this State: "I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully discharge all the duties devolving upon me as mayor (or councilman, as the case may be) of the City of Wrens, according to the best of my ability and understanding, so help me God." 
Sec. 6.1. - Mayor and council compensation and reimbursement. 
The mayor and councilpersons shall be authorized to establish the compensation of such officers as provided by general law. Such officers shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ga. Laws 2004 (Act No. 675), p. 3847, § 1) 
Sec. 7. - Officers. 
Said mayor and councilmen shall have power and authority to elect such marshals, clerks and other subordinate officers as they may deem necessary to the proper discharge of the duties pertaining to the general welfare of said city, and to prescribe the fees and duties of such subordinate officers, and require such bonds from all of the municipal officers as they may deem necessary. 
Sec. 8. - Mayor, powers of. 
The mayor of said city shall be the chief executive officer of said town [city]. He shall preside at all meetings, and shall have the general supervision and control of said city. He shall preside at the municipal court, unless disqualified for some reason, and shall try all offenders, and inflict such punishment for offenses against the municipal laws as, in his judgment, may be proper. He shall have authority to impose fines, costs, and forfeitures for each offense in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for the violation of any law or ordinance of the City of Wrens passed in accordance with the Charter and to imprison offenders for a period of not more than 60 days or at labor on the roads and streets or other public works of said city for not more than 60 days; and the said mayor shall have the power and authority to impose any one or more of these punishments when he shall find that the facts of the case so justify. Said mayor shall not have the authority to inflict a greater punishment for contempt than to impose a fine of $100.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 20 days, or both. 
(Ga. Laws 1981 (Act No. 325), p. 3913, § 1) 
Sec. 8.1. - Municipal court judge. 
Be it further enacted by authority aforesaid that the Charter of the said City of Wrens, Georgia, be, and the same is hereby amended to authorize the mayor and council of the said city in their discretion, should they see fit to do so, to employ a municipal court judge, and to fix and pay his salary or to fix a fee basis for his compensation. 
(Ga. Laws 1952 (Act No. 617), p. 2324, § 3) 
Editor's note— The amendment to the city Charter enacted by 1952 Ga. Laws (Act No. 617), p. 2324, § 3 did not amend a specific section of the Charter, but has been included as § 8.1 in the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 9. - Municipal powers. 
The mayor and council of said city shall have power and authority to pass all ordinances and by-laws that they may deem necessary for the government of said city; provided that they be not repugnant to the Constitution of the State of Georgia, or the United States, or any part of the laws thereof. 
Sec. 10. - Taxes, ad valorem and specific. 
Said mayor and council shall have power and authority to levy and collect an ad valorem tax upon all the taxable property owned or kept within the corporate limits of said city, both real and personal, not to exceed two percent for each fiscal year. They shall have the power and authority to levy and collect a special tax upon all business avocations and professions carried on in the said city, and shall have the authority to arrange, by ordinance, for the collection and enforcement of the payment of all such taxes by execution and sale, or by penal process of attachment. It shall be in their option to adopt ordinances laying a special tax upon all shows, circuses, peddlers, venders of patent or proprietary medicines, insurance agents, and agents of every sort and kind, and upon all kinds and classes of occupations and professions. 
(Ga. Laws 1919 (Act No. 101), p. 1396, § 1; Ga. Laws 1952 (Act No. 617), p. 2324, § 1) 
Sec. 11. - Street tax. 
The mayor and council of said city shall have the power to collect, annually, a street tax of $2.00 per annum from each and every male person within said corporate limits who are, under the law, liable to road duty, and to enforce the payment of the same by compulsory work on the streets or other public works of said city. 
Sec. 12. - Police powers. 
The mayor and council of said city shall have the power and authority to define and abate all nuisances within the corporate limits of said city; to regulate butcher pens and butcher shops and fish stands within said city; to create a fire limit, and prescribe the material out of which buildings shall be built within said limits; to regulate and control all hotels and boarding houses; to take up and impound all dogs, horses, cows, hogs, calves, or other domestic animals, and to pass such ordinances as may be deemed necessary for the regulation of stock within the corporate limits. They shall also have the power and authority to lay off, open up, close or alter streets and alleys of said city; to regulate the width of sidewalks and streets, and to pave the streets of said city, assessing the cost thereof against the adjoining land owners; to remove obstructions from the said streets; to punish for vagrancy; to organize a city chain-gang, and to put at compulsory work thereon all those convicted of violating the city laws, and to have all additional powers usually and properly incident to municipal corporations, including the right to establish, own, use and control a system of water-works and electric lights for said city. 
Sec. 13. - Bonds for public utilities and school buildings. 
Mayor and council of said city shall have the power and authority to contract debts and issue bonds of said city, under and in accordance with the limitations provided in the Constitution of the State, and the general laws of the state applicable to municipalities, and with the funds arising from the sale of such bonds may refund existing debts, establish and maintain a system of waterworks and electric lights, erect public buildings, including school buildings, or other improvements for use of the citizens of said city. 
(Ga. Laws 1917 (Act No. 70), p. 971, § 1) 
Sec. 14. - Vacancies. 
(a)  By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilman to serve as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's physical or mental disability or absence. The city council by a majority vote shall elect a new presiding officer from among its members for any period in which the mayor pro tem is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of the council. 
(b)  If the office of a councilman becomes vacant for any reason, other than the expiration of the term of office, and: 
(1)  There are more than 180 days remaining before the expiration of the term of such office, a special election to fill such vacancy shall be conducted as soon as permissible under general law; or 
(2)  There are 180 or fewer days remaining before the expiration of the term of such office, that office shall remain vacant until filled at the next regular municipal election. 
(c)  If the office of mayor becomes vacant for any reason, other than expiration of the term of office, and: 
(1)  There are more than 180 days remaining before the expiration of the term of such office, a special election to fill such vacancy shall be conducted as soon as permissible under general law and the mayor pro tem shall exercise the powers and duties of the office of mayor until that vacancy is filled; or 
(2)  There are 180 or fewer days remaining before the expiration of the term of such office, the mayor pro tem shall become the mayor until the office of mayor is filled at the next general election. 
(Ga. Laws 2003 (Act No. 221), p. 3990, § 1) 
ARTICLE II. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS, SEWERAGE AND DRAINAGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is an amendment to the city Charter enacted by 1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 78), p. 1728. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. Other additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the Act and enacting clause have been deleted. Any provisions regarding the severability, repealer, jurat, affidavit or notice of publication, publication date, or the adoption or effective date of the ordinance or Act have been omitted. Each section of the original Act began with the prefatory language "[b]e it enacted by the authority aforesaid that," or "[b]e it further enacted that." At the editor's discretion, this prefatory language has been omitted from this printing. 

Sec. 1. - Authority for street improvements. 
The aforesaid City of Wrens, Jefferson County, Georgia, through its legally constituted authorities, is hereby authorized and empowered to pave, macadamize, curb, and otherwise improve any or all of the sidewalks, footways, crosswalks, drains, gutters, roads, lanes, alleys, streets, public squares, or other public places or highways, or any portion thereof, within the corporate limits of said city, and to assess the cost of such improvements in whole or in part against the abutting-property owners, and of the owners thereof benefited, and by suitable ordinance of the aforesaid authorities to provide for the apportionment and collection by legal process of such assessments, and to create a lien on such property therefor; and to provide for the issuance of bonds to be known as street-improvements bonds, which may be negotiated, sold, or otherwise hypothecated by said city, or used otherwise in making provisions for the payment of the cost of such improvements; and to authorize the levy and collect on of a tax on all the property in said city subject to municipal taxation, to be used in defraying the town's (city's) share of the expense of such improvement in conformity with the provisions of this Act. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Board of appraisers. 
Whenever any of the sidewalks, footways, drains, gutters, streets, roads, lanes, alleys, public squares, highways, or other public places, or any portion thereof within the limits of said city, shall have been authorized under the laws and ordinances thereof, to be paved, macadamized, curbed, or otherwise improved, and the contract therefor has been let, and the cost of such improvements has been ascertained, which cost shall [Illegible Text] all of the expenses incurred by the city incident to such improvements, including the cost of intersections on any street or streets to be paved, the mayor and council of said city shall by written resolution appoint a board of appraisers consisting of five persons, who shall be freeholders of said City of Wrens, and shall possess the same qualifications as are required by the Charter and ordinances of said City of Wrens for the office of mayor; and when said board are appointed, they shall do and perform all the duties provided for in this Act. In the event any member of said board of appraisers is disqualified by reason of interest, relationship, or other cause, the mayor and council of said city is authorized to appoint in the place of said disqualified member another person as a member of the aforesaid board. The said board of appraisers, within ten days from the date of the resolution appointing said board, shall file a written report of the appraisal and assessment and apportionment of such expense and cost to the several lots and tracts of land abutting on said street, alley, lane, avenue, or other public place so improved, with the clerk of council of said city, in the manner and on the basis herein provided. When such report shall have been returned and filed, the mayor and council shall appoint a time for the holding of a session of council, or shall designate a regular meeting of council for the hearing of any complaint or objections that may be made concerning said appraisement, apportionment and assessment as to any such tracts or lots of land abutting on said improvement; and notice of the said session for the said hearing shall be published by the said clerk of council, once a week for two consecutive weeks, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Wrens, and said notice shall provide for an inspection of such report by any property-owner or other party interested in such report. The time fixed for said hearing shall not be less than seven days nor more than 15 days from the last publication. The said mayor and council at said session shall have the power to review and correct said appraisement, apportionment, and assessment, and to hear objections to the same, and to confirm the same, either as made by the said board or as corrected by said mayor and council. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Assessments. 
The said mayor and council shall by written resolution levy an assessment against the lots or parcels of land abutting on said improvement, in accordance with said appraisement and assessment, as confirmed by the said mayor and council, and such assessments shall be due and payable 15 days after the date of the ordinances levying said assessments, without interest; but each and every owner of property against which such an assessment has been levied shall have the privilege of electing to pay the same in ten equal annual installments, one of said installments being payable on the first day of December next succeeding the date of the levy of such assessment, or at such other date or dates as the mayor and council may in their discretion fix, and one annual installment, together with annual or semi-annual interest as fixed by said mayor and council upon the amount remaining unpaid, shall become due and payable on the first day of December each succeeding year, by giving to the City of Wrens his promissory notes in a form approved by said mayor and council for such deferred payments, with proper interest coupons attached thereto for interest from the date of the ordinance levying said assessments, and payable annually or semi-annually and on such dates as are fixed in said ordinance, which said notes shall not be in satisfaction and extinguishment of said assessments and the lien thereof, but shall be secured by said assessments and the lien thereof on the property against which they have been levied, and said assessments and liens shall be enforced for the payment thereof. Any property-owner by electing to pay said assessment in ten equal annual installments, by giving promissory notes for said installments, shall be conclusively and forever held to have agreed, admitted, and declared that the said assessment is in every respect a valid lien against his property in accordance with the terms of the ordinance levying said assessments, and shall be forever estopped from contesting the same on any grounds whatsoever. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Lien of assessment. 
Such special assessment and each installment thereof, together with the interest thereon, shall be a special lien against the lots, parcels, or tracts of land so assessed, from the date of the resolution levying the assessment, to be equal with the lien for other taxes, and prior and superior to all other liens against such lots, parcels, or tracts of land, and such liens shall continue until such assessments and the interest thereon is fully paid. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Street-improvement bonds. 
Any time after the date of the passage of the ordinance or resolution apportioning and levying the aforesaid assessment, the mayor and council of the City of Wrens may by written ordinance or resolution provide for the issuance of bonds in the aggregate amount remaining unpaid, which shall bear date as may be fixed and determined in said ordinance or resolution. Said bonds to be of such denomination as said mayor and council may determine, which bonds shall in no event become a debt or liability of said City of Wrens by reason of its issuing the same for the purposes herein specified. One-tenth of the amount of such series shall become due and payable on the first day of January next succeeding date of the issuance thereof, and one-tenth of the amount of such issue of bonds, together with the interest, annual or semi-annual, upon the whole amount thereof remaining unpaid, shall be payable on the first day of January in each succeeding year until all of said installments shall have been paid; said bonds shall bear interest at not exceeding eight percent per annum from their date until maturity, which interest may be required to be paid annually or semi-annually as said mayor and council may determine, and shall be designated "street-improvement bonds," and shall on their face recite the street or streets or other public places for the improvement of which they have been issued, and that they are payable exclusively from assessments which have been levied upon lots, parcels, and tracts of land benefited by such improvements under the authority of this Act; said bonds shall be signed by the mayor of the City of Wrens, and attested by the clerk thereof, and shall have thereon the impression of the incorporate seal of said city, and shall have attached thereon interest coupons, and all bonds issued by virtue of this Act shall be payable at such place, either within or without the State of Georgia, as may be designated by said mayor and council; the proceeds of said bonds shall be applied to the payment of the contract price and other legal expenses incurred in making such improvements, or such bonds may be, in whole or in part, negotiated and delivered to the contracting person, persons, firm, firms, corporation, or corporations making and having made such improvements, at such price as may be agreed upon in payment of any amount or amounts due such contract or contracts; and any portions of the bonds not so negotiated may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the aforesaid authorities of the City of Wren, and the proceeds applied to any expense incident to and incurred by the city in providing for such improvements; said bonds shall be registered by the clerk of the City of Wrens as other bonds are authorized to be registered under the laws of this state, and a certificate of such registration shall be endorsed upon each of said bonds. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Collection of assessments. 
The assessments provided for and levied under the provisions of this Act shall be payable by the persons owning said lots, parcels, or tracts of land on the first day of December of each year, together with interest thereon, to the clerk of the City of Wrens, who shall issue proper receipts therefor. The aforesaid officer of the City of Wrens shall keep an accurate account of all such collections made by him, which shall be kept as a separate fund to be used and applied to the payment of such bonds and the interest thereon, and for no other purpose; and the mayor and council of said City of Wrens is authorized and empowered, by proper ordinance, to fix the date or dates for the payment of all assessments and interest thereon as in their discretion they deem advisable, when not inconsistent with any of the other provisions of this Act relating thereto. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Execution for assessment; levy and sale. 
Upon failure of any property-owner to pay any assessment herein levied, the City of Wrens is authorized to issue its execution against such property-owner and such property for such sums as may be due, with interest, for such paving and improvements as are made by virtue of this Act, and to enforce the payment thereof by levy and sale, which execution shall be issued and sale thereunder conducted as in case of the issuance of executions and sales for other city taxes, and such sale shall vest in the purchaser absolute title to the property sold, subject to the lien of the remaining unpaid installments with interest; and as against any assessment for the improvements herein provided for, and the enforcement of the same by execution and levy, any abutting-property owner shall have the right to file an affidavit of illegality, returnable to the Superior Court of Jefferson County, and to contest the legality of such assessment, which affidavit of illegality shall set forth in detail the reasons why the affiant claims the execution is proceeding illegally; and if any part of said execution is admitted to be due, the affiant shall pay the same to the levying officer before such levying officer shall be required to receive and return said affidavit of illegality to the Superior Court of Jefferson County. When said affidavit is filed, the same shall be tried and determined as in other cases of illegality, subject to all penalties provided by law in cases where such proceedings are filed for delay only; and said affiant shall be required to give bond with good and sufficient security for the payment of costs in the event said illegality is not sustained, or in lieu thereof may file an affidavit in forma pauperis as provided in claim cases. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Mode of assessment. 
Said mayor and council in its discretion may assess the whole or any part of the expense of constructing sidewalks, footwalks, curbing, drains, and gutters along the sides of all public thoroughfares in said city, together with the whole or any part of the cost of all material used in making such street improvements, against the property abutting on such thoroughfares, street, or highways receiving such benefits, which shall be against the property and the owners thereof according to its frontage, as is provided in this Act; and the cost of making such other street improvements as are authorized under this Act shall be appropriated and assessed as follows: Not exceeding two-thirds of the cost and expenses of improvements made in pursuance of this Act shall be assessed against the abutting property and its owners on the two sides of the street or other public thoroughfares paved, macadamized, or otherwise improved, according to its front footing and in connection with the other provisions of this Act prescribing the manner in which said apportionment and assessments are to be made, and the balance or residue of such expenses and cost shall be chargeable to and borne by the City of Wrens, Georgia, which may be paid by the levy and collection of an ad valorem tax or by the issuance of bonds other than the street-improvement bonds authorized by this Act to be issued, or by any funds which may be allotted to Jefferson County, for the use and benefit of the public street in the City of Wrens, by the State or Federal Government, or by the State and Federal Government, or either state or federal public-road funds, or both; and that either of the funds herein provided for may be supplemented by the levy of an ad valorem tax, by the issuance of bonds, or by state or federal road funds allotted to the City of Wrens under the laws of this state. The mayor and council of the City of Wrens, Georgia, are hereby authorized to fix the assessments to be paid by the abutting-land owners on any street or on any block in said city which is to be paved, at any fractional part of the cost of said improvement not to exceed the said two-thirds thereof, and for that purpose they are to take into consideration the location of the property, the improvements thereon, and the value thereof, and the nearness or remoteness of such street or block from the business or residential section of said city, the presence or absence of parks or boulevards, the width of the street, or any factor in the discretion any basis for fixing the proportion to be paid by the abutting-land owners; but in no event shall such apportionment exceed said two-thirds as hereinabove provided for. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Assessment where railroad company or county is owner of property. 
When the right of way of any railroad company crosses any street, highway, or other thoroughfare within the corporate limits of said city, such company shall be deemed, for the purpose of this Act, as the owner of property on both sides of the street, highway, or thoroughfare to the extent of the entire width of the right of way, irrespective of the use to which the same may be put or the portion thereof actually occupied by its tracks. Any and all property owned by Jefferson County lying within the corporate limits of said city, and abutting any street or highway thereof, shall be assessable for any and all public improvements authorized by this Act, in the same manner and to the same extent as such property would be if owned by any private individual, without regard to the use made by the county of such property, and such assessments made against such property shall be collected from the county by an action at common law against said county, or by such other legal methods as is allowed by law for the collection of demands against said county. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - Authority to enact ordinances, etc. 
The mayor and council of the City of Wrens is authorized and empowered to enact such ordinance and ordinances and adopt such resolution or resolutions as may be necessary to carry out the powers herein conferred, as well to make all necessary provisions for the apportionment, assessment, and collection of all cost and expenses herein provided for against the abutting property and the owners thereof for such street improvements as may be made under this Act, and is authorized and empowered to fix and determine the date or dates for the payment of such assessments and the interest thereon either in annual or semi-annual payments. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Cooperation of city with county authorities and state highway department. 
The City of Wrens is authorized and empowered to make all the improvements provided for in this Act, independent of or in connection with the authorities of Jefferson County having control of the fiscal affairs, the roads and highways thereof, and with the state highway department, as is now provided by the Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved December 17, 1901, upon such terms as may be fixed by said state highway department, not inconsistent with this Act, and make all contracts necessary in connection therewith. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Appraisal of value of land taken or damaged. 
The mayor and council of the City of Wrens, shall have full and complete control of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, and squares of said city, and shall have power and authority to open, lay out, widen, straighten, or otherwise change all streets, sidewalks, alleys, and squares in said City of Wrens. Whenever the said mayor and city council of the City of Wrens shall exercise the power herein delegated, and shall fail to agree with the owner or owners of the property taken or damaged as to the amount of damage, the said mayor and city council of Wrens shall choose one appraiser and the owners of the lands to be taken or damaged shall choose another appraiser, and the two thus chosen, if they fail to agree, shall select a third appraiser, and the three appraisers thus chosen, after being sworn to do justice between the parties, shall fix the damage to the owner of the property caused by the opening or changing of such street, alley, or square; and if the property-owner after five days' notice shall fail to name an appraiser, the clerk shall appoint one for him; and in every case where the two appraisers chosen shall, for the space of five days, fail to agree upon the third appraiser, the said clerk shall appoint such appraiser; provided the said appraisers shall be citizens of said city. The award of the appraisers shall be in writing, and shall be filed within five days in the clerk's office of the Superior Court of Jefferson County, and shall thereupon operate as a judgment and execution may issue thereon. Either party may, within ten days from the filing of the award, enter an appeal to the Superior Court of Jefferson County. All costs, including the fees of the appraisers, shall be paid by the city; and at any stage of the proceedings to condemn, before or after the final award, the mayor and council of the City of Wrens may, by paying to the property-owner all expenses actually incurred by him, withdraw the proceedings and decline to take the property, or to make the change in such street, alley, sidewalk, or square. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Assessment against county. 
When any property of Jefferson County abuts upon any sidewalk in said city, the City of Wrens shall have power and authority to pave, curb, remove, or repair the same and assess the whole cost of the same against the county, according to frontage; and when such property abuts upon any street, alley, or way that is graded, paved, or otherwise improved by the said City of Wrens, said city shall have power and authority to assess against said Jefferson County its proportionate part of the cost of such grading, paving, or improving, according to frontage; and the method of collection, in case of refusal to pay, shall be by suit against the County Commissioners of Jefferson County in some court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 13) 
Sec. 14. - Suit to set aside or enjoin assessment. 
No suit shall be sustained to set aside any such assessment or to enjoin the said mayor and council from making any such assessment or levying or collecting any such assessment, or from issuing bonds as hereinafter provided, or providing for their payment as herein authorized, or to contest the validity thereof, on any ground or for any reason, unless such suit shall be commenced within 60 days after the passage of the ordinance making such assessment final; provided that in the event any special assessment shall be found to be invalid or insufficient either in whole or in part, for any reason whatsoever, the said mayor and council may at any time, in the manner provided for the levying of the original assessment, proceed to cause a new assessment to be made and levied, which shall have like force and effect as an original assessment. 
(Ga. Laws 1927 (Act No. 78), p. 1728, § 14) 
Sec. 15. - Sewerage and drainage. 
The mayor and council of the City of Wrens shall have power to open, reopen, straighten or otherwise install and change sewerage disposal and drainage lines in the said city. Whenever the mayor and council of the said City of Wrens shall exercise the power herein delegated, and shall fail to agree with the owner or owners of property taken or damaged as to the amount of damage, the same procedure shall be followed as is provided for with respect to streets in the existing laws, and as is specifically provided in Section 12 of the Act approved July 30, 1927 (Ga. Laws of 1927, p. 1728), with respect to "Wrens Street Improvements." [Reprinted here as Art. II, Section 12 of the city Charter.] 
(Ga. Laws 1951 (Act No. 453), p. 3278, § 4) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of Charter amendments. The Charter is derived from 1901 Ga. Laws (Act No. 369), page 722. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Wrens, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "Wrens City Code." 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules shall apply to all ordinances of the mayor and council, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpolations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the mayor and council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. While this Code is a codification of general ordinances and the city's unified development ordinance (UDO) is separate from this Code and pertains to land development, provisions in this Code may also apply to land development and provisions in the UDO may also apply to activities other than land development. The failure to include in the UDO provisions that relate to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provisions. The inclusion in the UDO of provisions that relate to activities other than land development does not excuse noncompliance with such provisions. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the mayor and council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Adequate . The term "adequate" means equal to what is required, suitable to the case or occasion, fully sufficient, proportionate or satisfactory. 
Aforesaid . The term "aforesaid" usually means next before. 
All . The term "all" means everyone, or the whole number of particulars. 
Also . The term "also" means "in like manner," "likewise," "in addition," "besides," "as well," "further," and "too." 
As soon as possible . The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
At . The term "at" may mean "in," "near," "within," or "about." Its primary idea is nearness, and it is less definite than "in" or "on." 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
Code . The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Wrens, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation 
Conjunctions . In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
Council. Wherever the term "council" is used, the same shall be held to mean the "council of the City of Wrens." 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Jefferson County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act. 
Easement. The term "easement" means a right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another; or a right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right in the owner. 
Following . The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter. 
Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Land and real estate. The terms "land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
May . The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Municipality. The term "municipality" means the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
Must . The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number shall include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc. Reference to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city by title only refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall . The term "shall" is to be construed as mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street, road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Until a certain day. The term "until a certain day" includes all of such day. 
Week . The term "week" means seven days. 
Whereas . The term "whereas" means "considering that." 
Will . The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing . The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year . The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; editor's notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, state enabling legislation references, state law references and editor's notes which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Territorial applicability. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided otherwise, this Code only applies in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  Where the city provides utility or other service to an outside the incorporated area of the city, the ordinances relating to such service apply in that area outside such incorporated area. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, ordinances and resolutions which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time take effect immediately upon adoption. 
Sec. 1-6. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner, except by ordinance or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Every proposed ordinance shall be read twice, once at each of two distinct meetings of the mayor and council, except that both the first and second readings thereof shall be done by reading the caption thereof only, unless, upon motion and a majority vote of the mayor and council, the mayor and council request the reading of the proposed ordinance in its entirety; provided, however, that the mayor and council may provide that the proposed ordinance be read in its entirety at only the first or second reading thereof; further provided, that at any reading of a proposed ordinance, the mayor or other presiding officer may require that a synopsis be given of the proposed ordinance, either before or after the reading thereof. In case of emergency, an ordinance may be read twice by unanimous consent at the same session and passed. The reading of a proposed ordinance, in the event of such emergency, shall be done in the same manner as other proposed ordinances, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ___ of the Code of the City of Wrens, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Wrens, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered ___, which reads as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or work on the public streets or public works of the city for a term not exceeding 60 days subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a fine or penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a fine or penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-5) 
State Law reference— Sentences and fines which may be imposed, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5. 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2002, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-12. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing legislation. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing as of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-13. - Matters not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following ordinances not codified in this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(4)  Any ordinance approving the budget. 
(5)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city. 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city to any person. 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, defining, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(8)  Any ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets. 
(9)  Any legislation providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance rezoning property or otherwise pertaining to zoning. 
(12)  Any ordinance adopting or amending the City of Wrens Unified Development Ordinance, as adopted December 20, 2007. 
(13)  Any ordinance adopting or amending the city personnel policy. 
(14)  Any ordinance pertaining to the annexation of property. 
(15)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes that have been consummated. 
(16)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in nature. 
(17)  Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in nature. 
(18)  Any ordinance levying or otherwise relating to taxes. 
(19)  Any ordinance amending any act enacted by the general assembly of the state. 
Sec. 1-14. - Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties, rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. title 36; open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BODY 

Sec. 2-19. - Compensation. 
(a)  The mayor shall be compensated for services to the city in the amount of $4,800.00 annually and shall receive no expense allowance. However, the mayor may receive his actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his duties of office. 
(b)  Each councilmember shall be compensated for his services to the city in the amount of $2,400.00 annually and shall receive no expense allowance. However, each councilmember may receive his actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his duties of office. 
(Code 2002, § 2-1-1; Ord. No. 02-007-2004, § 1, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 2-20. - Regular meetings, special meetings. 
(a)  All regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be held at the city hall annex building located at 223 Broad Street on the third Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  Special or called meetings may be had at any time upon the call of the mayor or any two councilmembers; provided, however, that not less than 24 hours' notice shall be given to the mayor and councilmembers orally or in writing and that notice of the time, place and purpose of the called meeting shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the bulletin board in city hall not less than 24 hours in advance of the special or called meeting. 
(c)  Any business may be transacted at a regular meeting or called meeting if all members of the council are present and such action is unanimous, but if any member of council is absent, then only such business as was stated in the agenda can be transacted. 
(Code 2002, § 2-1-11; Ord. No. 01-002-2004, § 3, 2-13-2004; Ord. No. 01-008-2007, § 3, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 2017-11-02 , § 2, 11-7-2017) 
Sec. 2-21. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the city council. A quorum is three members of the city council. 
Sec. 2-22. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete the transaction of business scheduled for the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting. Said date shall be agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 2002, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-23. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Approval of minutes of last meeting; 
(2)  Approval of the financial statement; 
(3)  Unfinished/old business; 
(4)  New business; 
(5)  Councilmember reports; 
(6)  Staff reports; 
(7)  Ordinance readings; and 
(8)  Executive session. 
(b)  If the mayor and council direct any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor and council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any councilmember, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 2002, § 2-1-13) 
Sec. 2-24. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the parliamentary procedures of the mayor and council shall be governed by the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised (11th edition). 
(Code 2002, § 2-1-14) 
Sec. 2-25. - Previous questions. 
Previous questions may be called at any time by a majority of the councilmembers present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any councilmember. 
(Code 2002, § 2-1-15) 
Sec. 2-26. - Motions having precedence. 
(a)  When a question is under consideration no motion shall be received except as follows: 
(1)  To lay on the table; 
(2)  To postpone to a time certain; 
(3)  To postpone indefinitely; 
(4)  To refer to a committee; 
(5)  To amend; 
(6)  To strike out or insert; or 
(7)  To divide. 
(b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Code 2002, § 2-1-16) 
Sec. 2-27. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 2002, § 2-1-17) 
Secs. 2-28—2-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-58. - City clerk; duties. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(2)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; 
(3)  Receive all money due the city, including taxes, licenses and fees, and payout the same only upon orders of the mayor and council; and 
(4)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-1) 
Sec. 2-59. - City attorney; duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council; 
(2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts; and 
(3)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-2) 
Sec. 2-60. - City administrator; qualifications; duties; removal. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city administrator to execute and administer the policies of the city government fixed by the mayor and council, and to have authority over all administrative matters of the city and to be accountable only to the mayor and council. The city administrator shall be selected by the mayor and council on the basis of ability, experience in or his knowledge of practice in respect to the duties of his office and experience and familiarity in dealing with state and federal agencies in city-related matters. During his tenure of office, the city administrator shall reside within the city, normal moving and transfer of residence time excepted, and shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office and shall not engage in any other business or profession. 
(b)  The city administrator shall: 
(1)  See that the laws of the state and the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(2)  Prepare the agenda and attend meetings of the mayor and council and recommend for adoption any measure deemed proper and suitable for the city; 
(3)  Make reports to the mayor and council from time to time upon the affairs of the city and keep the mayor and council fully advised of the city's financial condition and its future needs; 
(4)  Correspond with state and federal agencies and departments, regarding state or federal qualifications or rules for the city, or grants or loans available to the city, and report such correspondence to the mayor and council; 
(5)  Upon the direction and advice of the mayor and council, appoint and suspend or remove all city employees, except the municipal court judge, associate municipal court judge, city attorney, city treasurer, or city clerk, in accordance with such general rules, regulations, policies or ordinances as the mayor and council may adopt; 
(6)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the mayor and council; 
(7)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, properties, and operations of the city, subject to the general direction and control of the mayor and council; 
(8)  Investigate the affairs, records, accounts, and expenditures of the various commissions and boards created by the city and report thereon at least once a year to the mayor and council; 
(9)  Have the right to request the council, advice or opinion of the city attorney concerning any matter affecting the interest of the city; 
(10)  Act in a liaison capacity on behalf of the mayor and council with boards, offices, agencies, and commissions of the city; 
(11)  Attest contracts, deeds, licenses, and other public documents on behalf of the city with the city clerk as an alternate attesting signatory, after approval of the mayor and council; 
(12)  Exercise any other powers and perform any other duties required or authorized by the mayor and council and not inconsistent with the Charter, code or ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Removal of city administrator. 
(1)  The mayor and council may remove the city administrator by a majority vote of all of its members by adopting a resolution to that effect. In the event the administrator is sought to be removed by the action of the mayor and council, he shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal, with termination to become effective not sooner than 30 days from receipt of said notice. The city administrator may, within ten days after notice of adoption of such resolution, reply in writing and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than 15 or later than 25 days after the filing of such request. Following a public hearing, if requested, the decision of the mayor and council in removing the city administrator shall be final. 
(2)  When there shall be a vacancy in the office of the city administrator, the duties and functions of the city administrator shall be discharged by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-3) 
Secs. 2-61—2-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-79. - Departments established. 
The following departments of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  Administrative; 
(2)  Police; 
(3)  Fire; 
(4)  Gas; 
(5)  Public works; 
(6)  Water; 
(7)  Solid waste collection; 
(8)  Building and grounds; and 
(9)  Wastewater treatment plant. 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-4) 
Secs. 2-80—2-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-102—2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-131. - Planning commission: creation; composition; terms. 
The city planning and zoning commission, hereinafter the "planning commission," is hereby created and established. The planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. The term of the members shall be for five years, except that in the appointment of the first planning commission pursuant to this article, the members shall be appointed for varying terms in order that future terms shall be staggered. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-1; Ord. No. 001-007-2014, § 3, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-132. - Planning commission vacancies; compensation. 
Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-2) 
Sec. 2-133. - Removal of planning commission members for nonattendance. 
Any member who fails to attend five consecutive meetings of the planning commission shall be conclusively presumed to have resigned and the post may be declared vacant by the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-3) 
Sec. 2-134. - Officers; staff; expenditures; meetings; records of the planning commission. 
The planning commission shall elect a chairperson from its members. The term of the chairperson shall be for one year, and he shall be eligible for re-election as chairperson. The planning commission shall be entitled to receive such assistance from the employees of the city as it shall request and shall be authorized to secure such professional assistance on a full-time or part-time basis as it may in its discretion deem necessary or appropriate, provided that the expenditures therefore shall be not in excess of such amounts as may be appropriated therefore by the mayor and council. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and shall determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action shall be taken or discussed shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be public records and shall be kept in the custody of the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-4) 
Secs. 2-135—2-151. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-152. - Declaration of necessity for a Downtown Development Authority. 
There is hereby determined and declared an urgent existing and future need for a development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.) to function in the city for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in said city thereby promoting the general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-11) 
Sec. 2-153. - Activation of the Downtown Development Authority. 
There is hereby activated in the city the public body corporate and politic known as the "Downtown Development Authority of the City of Wrens" which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Downtown Development Authorities Law. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-12) 
Sec. 2-154. - Downtown development area defined. 
The "Downtown Development Area," as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-42-3(3), shall consist of all areas within the city limits which are zoned commercial as provided by the City of Wrens' Unified Development Ordinance, as amended. The city may modify the designated Downtown Development Area by subsequent resolution. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-13; Ord. No. 01-007-2004, § 1(6-1-13), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 2-155. - Composition of authority; qualifications; officers; training. 
(a)  The Downtown Development Authority of the city shall consist of a board of seven directors. Directors shall be: 
(1)  Taxpayers residing in the city; 
(2)  Owners or operators of businesses located within the Downtown Development Area who are taxpayers residing in the county; or 
(3)  Persons having a combination of the qualifications specified in subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section. Not less than four of the directors having the qualifications provided herein shall be persons who, in the judgment of the city council, either have or represent a party who has an economic interest in the redevelopment and revitalization of the Downtown Development Area. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, one director appointed to the board may reside outside the county; provided, however, that such appointed director owns a business within the Downtown Development Area and is a resident of the state. If subsequently to his appointment to the board pursuant to this subsection, the director ceases to own a business within the Downtown Development Area or reside in the state, such director shall relinquish his seat on the board. 
(c)  The city council may appoint one of its elected members as a director of the Downtown Development Authority. 
(d)  The directors shall elect one of their members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of whom may but need not be a director. The directors shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(e)  Directors shall attend and complete training on downtown development and redevelopment as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-42-7, as amended. 
(f)  A majority of the board of directors shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-14; Ord. No. 01-007-2004, § 1(6-1-14), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 2-156. - Terms of Downtown Development Authority board of directors. 
Except for a director who is a member of the city council, the terms of all directors shall be four years. Successors to the directors shall be appointed by the city council. The term of a director who is also a councilmember shall end when such director is no longer a member of the city council. If at the end of any term of office of any director a successor to such director has not been elected, the director whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until a successor is elected. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-15; Ord. No. 01-007-2004, § 1(6-1-15), 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 2-157. - Organization; powers; duties of the Downtown Development Authority. 
The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Code 2002, § 6-1-16) 
Secs. 2-158—2-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 2-183. - Personnel policies and procedures. 
(a)  The personnel policies of the city are hereby adopted by reference as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(b)  One copy of the personnel policy shall remain permanently in the office of the city clerk and one copy permanently in the office of the city administrator. Any employee of the city or resident thereof may copy all or a portion of the personnel policy upon paying such reasonable copying fees as the city may from time to time establish. 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-5) 
Sec. 2-184. - Holidays. 
The following days are designated as official holidays of the city: 
(1)  New Year's Day (January 1); 
(2)  Good Friday (Friday before Easter Sunday); 
(3)  National Memorial Day (last Monday in May); 
(4)  Independence Day (July 4); 
(5)  Labor Day; 
(6)  Thanksgiving Day and the following Friday; and 
(7)  Christmas Eve and Christmas Day (December 24, 25). 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-6) 
Sec. 2-185. - Social security coverage extended. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal Social Security Administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this section and sections 2-186 and 2-187, the benefits of the System of Old Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by the federal Social Security Act, the State Enabling Act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-11) 
Sec. 2-186. - Social security agreements; coverage of firefighters. 
The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia for coverage of said city employees and officials as provided for in section 2-185, to include any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner provided by said law. Specifically, employees covered by the Georgia Firemen's Pension Fund are included in the city's social security program. 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-12) 
Sec. 2-187. - Social security appropriations by city. 
There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions and administrative expenses, and such funds shall be paid over to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with regulations established by said agency. 
(Code 2002, § 2-4-14) 
Secs. 2-188—2-212. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-213. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year, and all normal and usual budgetary planning and projections shall coincide with such fiscal year. 
(Code 2002, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 2-214. - Annual budget; appropriations. 
An annual budget and an appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the mayor and council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget and the appropriations ordinance are not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, this section automatically authorizes the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Code 2002, § 2-5-2) 
Sec. 2-215. - Purchasing. 
The city administrator and city clerk shall be the purchasing agents of the city and shall: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city, and sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus city equipment and supplies with authorization by the mayor and council; and 
(2)  Maintain an inventory of all materials, supplies or equipment owned by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 2-5-3) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. title 3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide and ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source and by whatever means produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means malt beverages and wine. For the purpose of this chapter, alcoholic beverage does not include distilled spirits. 
Beer means any malt beverage. 
Distilled spirits means any beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any beverage containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Licensed dealer means any business or person who has met all of the requirements of this chapter and has applied for and received a permit to sell malt beverages and wine within the city. 
Malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume. Malt beverage shall include ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, malt beer, strong beer and hard cider. Malt beverage does not include sake (Japanese rice wine). 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person in control means an owner of the premises, holder of a security interest in the majority of the assets of a business applicant, a stock or other equity interest holder of ten percent or more of any corporate stock or other equity interest in a business applicant. 
Restaurant means any public establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served. Said establishment must contain an adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen and related equipment including a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill (permanently installed), a refrigerator and a dining room. All kitchen facilities and equipment must be approved by the county health department and city building inspector. The establishment must employ a sufficient number of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its customers. A restaurant must have a complete place setting of metal cutlery and dishware in regular use for a minimum of 30 people. A restaurant shall have the ability to seat a minimum of 30 customers at one time and shall have a minimum occupancy of at least 30 people as calculated by the building inspector according to the state minimum standard codes and the state fire code. A restaurant shall derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. A restaurant must be able to obtain and maintain a food service permit from the county health department, an occupation tax certificate from the city, and a regulatory fee permit from the city. 
Restaurant beverage dealer means any business or person operating a restaurant (as defined above) who sells malt beverages and/or wine "by the drink" for on-premises consumption. 
Retail beverage dealer means any business or person operating an establishment who sells malt beverages and/or wine "by the package" in unopened containers, at retail only, to customers for off-premises consumption. 
School building means only state, county, city, or church school buildings and such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
Wholesaler means any business or person who sells malt beverages and/or wine to other wholesale dealers or to licensed dealers. 
Wine means any beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, grapes or similar products by natural fermentation. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine (wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage) or fortified wine. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-1; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-1), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-2. - Sale without permit or license prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell or possess for the purpose of sale, any malt beverages or wine where such person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale such beverages. 
(Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-2), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-3. - Public drunkenness and drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk or to drink, consume or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage on any sidewalk, street, road, alleyway, right-of-way, commercial parking lot or any other public place within the corporate limits of the city, provided that open containers may be permitted in the city council's discretion within specific limits, imposed upon temporary permits granted to charitable or nonprofit organizations pursuant to section 4-53. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-4; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-4), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-4. - Delivery of illegal sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to send or bring within the corporate limits of the city any of the beverages enumerated in section 4-1 for the purpose of delivery to a buyer or to any other person in pursuance of any illegal sale of such beverages in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-5; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-5), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-5. - Permitted hours and days of sale and operation. 
(a)  The hours during which malt beverages and/or wine are authorized for sale by licensed dealers are Monday through Saturdays, from 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight. No malt beverages or wine shall be sold on Sundays. 
(b)  The hours of operation for wholesalers for the distribution of malt beverages and wine within the city shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. No malt beverages and/or wine shall be distributed on Sunday. 
(c)  Malt beverages and/or wine must not be consumed by customers on the premises of restaurants authorized to sell such beverages after 12:30 a.m. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-8; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-8), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-6. - Sale of distilled spirits prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any business or person to sell (by the package or by the drink) or distribute distilled spirits within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-9; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-9), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-7. - Private clubs prohibited. 
Private clubs are prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages and/or distilled spirits within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-11; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-11), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-8. - Other prohibited acts. 
The following acts or activities are prohibited: 
(1)  Selling malt beverages or wine to an individual that is in a state of noticeable intoxication. 
(2)  Selling malt beverages or wine to persons under 21 years of age. 
(3)  Permitting any disorderly conduct, breach of peace, or any lewd or unlawful entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. 
(4)  Permitting malt beverages or wine to be sold or consumed on the licensed premises during those days and times when the sale and/or consumption of such beverages is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Selling, offering for sale, possessing or permitting the consumption of any kind of distilled spirits on the licensed premises. 
(6)  No licensed dealer in the city shall accept delivery of any alcoholic beverage or make any purchase of alcoholic beverages except from a wholesaler having a permit from the city to make deliveries in the city and no licensed dealer shall purchase or accept delivery of any malt beverage or wine without making full payment to the wholesaler of the amount of the excise tax provided in this chapter. 
(7)  No licensed dealer shall store or maintain an inventory of malt beverages or wine at a location other than the licensed premises. Inventories stored at other locations other than the licensed premises are prohibited. 
(8)  Permitting customers of the licensed establishment to "brown bag" or bring malt beverages and/or wine into the licensed establishment. 
(9)  No malt beverages or wine may be sold or served in taxicabs, limousines or other types of paid transportation service. 
(10)  No licensee shall permit an employee or agent under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for malt beverages and wine. Persons younger than 18 years of age may sell malt beverages and wine at grocery stores and convenience stores provided that consumption will take place off-premises. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-12; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-12), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-9. - "Happy hours" and similar promotions prohibited. 
No restaurant beverage dealer, his employees or agents in connection with the sale of malt beverages or wine shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free malt beverage(s) or wine to any person. 
(2)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at a time. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, furnish or cause to be furnished to any person an unlimited number of malt beverages or wine during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a beverage. 
(5)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, furnish or cause to be furnished any alcoholic beverages for a price less than the wholesale cost to the licensee. 
(7)  No restaurant beverage dealer shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or outside of the premises, any of the acts or practices prohibited under this section. 
(8)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit restaurant beverage dealers from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit the restaurant beverage dealer from including a malt beverage or wine as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale of wine by the bottle or carafe, or the sale of malt beverages by the pitcher or bucket. 
(9)  The promotion of a "happy hour" or any other special hours in which malt beverage and/or wine sales are promoted through any form of media or exterior or interior signage is prohibited. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-13; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-13), 2-26-2007) 
Secs. 4-10—4-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-35. - Establishments eligible. 
(a)  Malt beverages and wine may be sold by licensed dealers who meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Malt beverages and wine may be sold "by the drink" for on-premises consumption in restaurants only. Establishments must: 
(1)  Meet the definition of restaurant as provided in section 4-1; 
(2)  Satisfy all other qualifications and requirements outlined in this chapter; and 
(3)  Be approved by the city council; 
to be considered a restaurant eligible to sell malt beverages and wine. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-3; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-3), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-36. - Compliance with chapter prerequisite to selling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at wholesale, retail, or at restaurants within the corporate limits of the city any malt beverages and/or wine until and unless such person has complied with this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-6; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-6), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-37. - Sale subject to conditions; license constitutes a privilege. 
(a)  Malt beverages and wine may only be sold in the corporate limits of the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions hereafter provided. 
(b)  All licenses shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by city ordinances and the laws of the state. 
(c)  All licenses granted pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on their face: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled. This license is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted by the City." 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-7; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-7), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-38. - Licensee to maintain copy of this chapter and familiarity with chapter. 
Each dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep a copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the provisions of this chapter. Each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with and abide by the terms of this chapter. The licensee shall be responsible for any acts of agents or employees which are in violation of this chapter or the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-10; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-10), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-39. - Qualifications and requirements for dealer permit. 
(a)  The person receiving a license for the sale of malt beverages and wine must be a person of good moral character and a citizen or legal resident alien of the United States. 
(b)  The applicant shall not have been convicted, within ten years of the date of the application, of a felony or any violation of the laws of the state or any other state or the laws of the city or any other government entity relating to the sale of intoxicating or alcoholic beverages or any other type of crime involving illegal drugs or controlled substances. 
(c)  The applicant shall not have had revoked, for cause (such as a violation of regulations or improper operation), any license issued to such person by a government entity to sell alcoholic beverages and/or distilled spirits within three years of the date of the application to the city. 
(d)  The applicant/licensee shall be the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the holder of a lease thereon. 
(e)  The licensee shall be solely responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
(f)  If the applicant is a partnership, all members of the partnership must meet the qualifications of this section to obtain a license. 
(g)  If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company (LLC), any officers, managers, members, directors or persons in control of the corporation or LLC and the persons who shall conduct or manage the licensed premises must meet the qualifications of this section to obtain a license. 
(h)  The applicant for a license under this chapter shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall place such statements on file with the city clerk upon application. 
(i)  All applicants must be able to show financial responsibility and may be required to furnish financial records at the request of the city council. 
(j)  The city shall make such investigation of the qualifications of each applicant for a license under this chapter as it may deem necessary. Applicants may be required to furnish the city with other types of documentation as proof that applicant meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(k)  All applicants must be at least 21 years of age at the time of submitting the application. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-14; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-14), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-40. - Application. 
Any person desiring to carry on the business of selling malt beverages and wine in the city shall file an application with the city clerk, providing the following information: 
(1)  The name, date of birth, street address and mailing address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or limited liability company, the applicant shall also provide the Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN) of the entity. 
(2)  Whether the business of the applicant is an individual, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, including any trade names that will be used. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include the name, address and date of birth of all shareholders owning ten percent or more of any type of corporate stock, directors, officers and persons in control. If the applicant is a partnership or limited liability company, the application shall state the name, address and date of birth of all partners/members therein. If the applicant is an individual or the applicant is utilizing a trade name, the application shall state the name, address and date of birth of all owners or parties having an interest therein. In all cases, the application shall state the names of all persons or entities holding any note, mortgage, or bill of sale to secure debt against the business. 
(3)  The location at which the establishment is to be conducted, and a description of the building in which the business is to be conducted, indicating the size and type of construction. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any partner, member, shareholder, director, officer, owner or party in interest has been convicted during the last ten years of any felony, misdemeanor or a violation of any municipal ordinance (other than non-DUI-related traffic offenses) in any state, county, municipal or federal court, and the particulars of such conviction. 
(5)  The prior business and residential addresses of the applicant for the past ten years. 
(6)  Names and addresses of three persons who have known the applicant (or shareholders, members, directors, officers, or agents) for the past five years. 
(7)  Whether the applicant or any partner, shareholder, member, officer, director or other persons connected with the applicant holds or has held any malt beverage, wine or distilled spirits license in any state at any time prior to the application, and the particulars thereof. 
(8)  The name and address of the person(s) who will manage the establishment or be responsible for its operation. 
(9)  Such other information as the city clerk or other city authority may require, either initially, at any time during the consideration of the application, or at any time thereafter. 
(10)  The application shall be accompanied by a plat or drawing prepared by a licensed surveyor or other qualified professional showing the proximity of the proposed place of business to surrounding buildings. The plat or drawing should identify any school building, school grounds, college campus, alcoholic treatment centers, housing authority property or government buildings located within 100 yards of the proposed location. 
(11)  The application shall be accompanied by detailed plans of the building and outside premises drawn to scale. The plans should include detailed floor plans to scale. 
(12)  If the proposed business of the applicant is a restaurant applying for a license to sell malt beverages and wine for on-premises consumption, the application must include a copy of a current food services permit issued by the county health department. 
(13)  The applicant shall attach evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building (deed) or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(14)  Applicants applying for a license to sell malt beverages and/or wine must submit to and authorize a criminal background check. 
(15)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any such initial permit or license only, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority submitting the fingerprints. 
(16)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-15; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-15), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-41. - Processing of application. 
Upon filing a completed application, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to turn such application over to the city council, the duty of which it shall be to investigate the facts as set out in the application, and to determine whether such person shall be granted a license to carry on such business. The city council may request the assistance of the city administrator and chief of police in conducting the investigation of the application. If the city council decides to deny the application, the city council shall mark on the application the word "disapproved," which application so marked shall be returned to the city clerk with instructions not to grant such license. If the city council decides to grant the application, it shall mark the application "approved," and return it to the city clerk, who shall immediately issue such license. The city council may take as much time as it deems necessary to investigate and approve or deny an application. All decisions approving, denying, suspending, or revoking a permit or license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-16; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-16), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-42. - Rehearing on denial. 
If any person is denied a license, such person may appeal the decision of the city council, in writing, by either separate instrument or by endorsing on the back of such application, "I request a rehearing by the Mayor and Council of the City of Wrens on the decision of the city council denying the issuance of the license herein applied for." Requests for rehearing must be filed within 30 days of the applicant's receipt of the city council's written denial. In the event of such request for rehearing, the city clerk shall file the request with the mayor and city council and shall schedule a hearing at a public meeting of such body, at which time it shall be the duty of such body to hear and determine such request. At the rehearing, the applicant shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. Following the rehearing, if the mayor and city council determine that the applicant is entitled to carry on the business under the terms of this chapter, the city clerk shall be instructed to issue the license as applied for. If the mayor and city council affirm the earlier decision to deny the issuance of the license to the applicant, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the mayor and city council's decision to affirm the earlier decision, which decision shall be final. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-17; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-17), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-43. - Denial or revocation; time limit on resubmission. 
When any license to sell malt beverages and wine is rejected or revoked by the mayor and city council, the city clerk shall not accept or consider any application from the same applicant for license within 12 months from the time of such rejection or revocation, unless the city council shall specifically direct the city clerk to receive the same. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-18; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-18), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-44. - License duration; types. 
Licenses to sell malt beverages and wine are only valid from the time of approval until December 31 of that year. Renewals of an existing license are valid after receipt of a license to December 31. The following types of licenses are available upon approval of the city council: 
(1)  Malt beverages and wine, wholesaler. 
(2)  Malt beverages and wine, restaurant beverage dealer, for consumption on-premises only. 
(3)  Malt beverages and wine, retail beverage dealer, package sales, for consumption off-premises only. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-19; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-19), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-45. - Display. 
The license issued under this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the permitted establishment in full view of the public. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-20; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-20), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-46. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
No person shall engage in the sale of malt beverages and wine in the city without first complying with the rules and requirements set out in this chapter. Any license issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The making of any material misstatement of fact or providing information on the application for a license which shall be later found to be false. 
(2)  All licenses are conditioned upon compliance with the rules and regulations set out in this chapter and the laws and regulations of the United States, the State of Georgia and the city. 
(3)  Any recurrent breaches of the peace, disturbances or altercations occurring on the licensed premises or the failure of the licensee or his employees promptly to report to the city police department any violation of the laws or ordinances governing the licensing and sale of malt beverages and wine. 
(4)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city. This includes failing to pay property taxes, occupation taxes, regulatory fees, etc. 
(5)  Suspension or revocation of a state retail dealer's license shall automatically operate to suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(6)  Any violation of this chapter shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license. 
(7)  Failure of a restaurant beverage dealer to obtain and maintain a valid food service permit from the county health department. 
(8)  Failure of the licensee to obtain any license or permit required by the state. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-21; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-21), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-47. - License suspension; other remedies. 
Any action taken by the mayor and city council to suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by the laws of the city or the state. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-22; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-22), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-48. - License suspension procedure; hearing. 
In the event the mayor and city council suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter, the mayor and city council shall provide written notice to the licensee of the action taken and shall state the reasons therefor. The licensee shall have 15 days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the mayor and council. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-23; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-23), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-49. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  A license may be immediately suspended for cause by the chief of police of the city on a temporary basis until the next regular meeting of the city council. At the meeting, the city council shall hear the reasons for the actions of the police chief and take permanent action concerning the suspension at that time. 
(b)  Additionally, the mayor and city council are hereby authorized to suspend the sale of malt beverages and wine under any license issued hereunder for any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the city council deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the city council determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of city council, at which time the suspension shall cease unless the same is extended by affirmative action of the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-24; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-24), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-50. - Transferability. 
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable or assignable to any other person or business location. If a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender the license to the city clerk. Such business shall not be permitted to sell malt beverages and wine until the new owner has applied for and received a new license. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-25; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-25), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-51. - Annual license renewal fee. 
All license holders, after holding a license for one year or through the end of the license year in which the license is issued, shall pay to the city clerk the annual renewal fee to renew the license for a period of one calendar year. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-26; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-26), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-52. - Audits. 
The city clerk or his designee shall have the authority to conduct an audit of the books and records of any licensee to ensure the licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In such event, the city clerk shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-27; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-27), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-53. - Temporary permits for charitable organizations authorized. 
(a)  Bona fide charitable and nonprofit organizations desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply, on forms furnished by the city clerk, for a permit authorizing the organization to sell malt beverages and wine for consumption on a designated premises for a period not to exceed five days. Applications for such temporary permit must include a copy of an official document such as a nonprofit certification by the Internal Revenue Service, constitution and/or bylaws of the organization, or a corporate charter which clearly states the purposes of the organization as being charitable or nonprofit. The applicant shall obtain a permit from the state department of revenue, alcohol and tobacco tax unit as well as comply with the application process in section 4-40. Any permit issued by the city as contemplated hereunder shall not be effective until such time as a permit has been obtained by the applicant from the state department of revenue, alcohol and tobacco tax unit. Applications under this section shall be submitted to city council for approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  There shall be a fee of $50.00 for applications submitted pursuant to this section. No license fee shall be charged for temporary permits for charitable organizations. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, charitable and nonprofit organizations authorized by city council to receive a temporary license must comply with all other rules and regulations of this chapter and the laws of the state. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-28; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-28), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-54. - Application fees. 
(a)  An application fee for a license will be payable, by cash or certified check, at the time of application as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages and wine, retail beverage dealer: $100.00. 
(2)  Malt beverages and wine, restaurant beverage dealer: $100.00. 
(3)  Malt beverages and wine, wholesaler: $50.00. 
(b)  The application fee will not be refunded to the applicant if the application is denied or is withdrawn following the city's investigation of the application. Application fees will not be prorated. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-29; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-29), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-55. - License fees. 
(a)  A license fee for the sale of malt beverages and wine will be payable, by cash or certified check, upon application and at annual renewal as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages and wine, retail beverage dealer: $400.00. 
(2)  Malt beverages and wine, restaurant beverage dealer: $500.00. 
(3)  Malt beverages and wine, wholesaler: $100.00. 
(b)  The license fee will be returned to the applicant if the application is denied. Payment for license fees for licenses commencing after January 31 will be prorated on a monthly basis for the remainder of the year. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-30; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-30), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-56. - Premises. 
No license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete or unless detailed plans of a building to be constructed and its outside premises are attached to the application along with a building permit for the building to be built or renovated. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with all city ordinances, state minimum standard codes and the laws of the state. Any proposed building shall be subject to final inspection and approval by the building inspector following completion of construction. Applicants with existing buildings and establishments shall bring those buildings and structures into compliance with city ordinances, the state fire code and state minimum standard codes prior to issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter. Each building shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises surrounding the building are readily visible from the street on which the building is located. A separate dealer's license shall be required for each place of business regardless of common ownership. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-33; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-33), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-57. - Use of open areas, patios and decks. 
Consumption of or the sale of malt beverages and wine in open areas or on decks or patios is not permitted unless an establishment holding a license complies with the following regulations: 
(1)  The open area, patio or deck must be enclosed in a manner that directs ingress and egress by the public through a single entrance, which entrance shall be under the control of the licensee. If an emergency exit is required, it must also be under the control of the licensee. 
(2)  The open area, patio or deck shall be enclosed by a structure at least 42 inches in height as measured from the floor of the open area, patio or deck. Such structure must meet all building code requirements of the city. 
(3)  Any license holder desiring to obtain approval for open area, patio or deck sales of malt beverages and wine must submit to the city building inspector a complete set of plans before approval for such sales may be granted. All plans and final construction pursuant to such plans shall meet the requirements of this chapter, the state fire code and any other applicable building codes. Written approval from the city building inspector, county health department and chief of the fire department must be obtained before the city will approve any open area, patio or deck sales of malt beverages and wine. 
(4)  Any structure or area set aside for open area, patio or deck sales of malt beverages or wine shall not contain a number of square feet that exceeds an amount greater than 40 percent of the heated square footage of the existing seating area of the establishment. 
(5)  Loudspeakers or other amplifiers of sound shall not be permitted on open areas, patios or decks. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-34; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-34), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-58. - Distance requirements. 
No business may offer to sell malt beverages and/or wine within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. No business may offer to sell malt beverages and/or wine within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. No business may offer to sell malt beverages and/or wine within 100 yards of any housing authority property. No business may offer to sell malt beverages and/or wine within 250 feet of any polling place on election days. For the purpose of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-35; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-35), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-59. - Place of sale or delivery of goods. 
No licensed dealer shall sell or deliver any malt beverages or wine to any person except in such licensee's place of business. Licensed dealers shall be permitted to load purchased goods into a customer's vehicle when the sale physically takes place and monies have been exchanged inside the licensee's place of business. Curb-service type sales, sales to customers in vehicles parked in parking areas and drive-thru sales are prohibited. The sale of alcoholic beverages by caterers is prohibited. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-36; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-36), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-60. - Prices to be conspicuously displayed. 
Each licensed dealer shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises a printed price list of the malt beverages and/or wine offered for sale; provided, however, in lieu thereof, a licensee may have the price placed on the bottle or container or on the shelf where the beverages are for sale. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-37; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-37), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-61. - Inspection of premises, records and inventories. 
The city administrator, city clerk, chief of police, building inspector or any designee of the city shall have the authority to inspect the establishment licensed under this chapter, including the premises, any financial records and inventories. Inspections shall be conducted during the customary hours in which the establishment is open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the laws of the state. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city official to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-38; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-38), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-62. - Posting of warning signs. 
Licensed dealers must post in a conspicuous place a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: 
"SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED." 
Restaurant beverage dealers shall also post another sign in a conspicuous place printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: 
"WARNING: DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS AND MAY BE DETRIMENTAL TO YOUR HEALTH." 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-39; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-39), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-63. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall assist or aid another to evade or avoid the payment of the license or excise tax imposed and provided in this chapter, or to otherwise violate this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and such violation shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license in accordance with this chapter and, upon conviction thereof in municipal court, each violator may be punished by a fine up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than six months. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-40; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-40), 2-26-2007) 
Secs. 4-64—4-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 4-85. - Excise taxes. 
The excise tax provided for in this article shall be in addition to any license fees, tax or charge which may be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages and wine, at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of the city. There is hereby levied and imposed upon all licensed dealers and wholesalers selling malt beverages and wine within the city a specific tax that shall be reported and paid to the city on or before the 20th day of each month for the previous month as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages. 
a.  In bulk containers of not more than 15.5 gallons to be paid by wholesalers at a rate of $6.00 per container. 
b.  In bottles, cans or other containers at a rate of $0.05 per 12 ounces. 
(2)  Wine. First sale by package at a rate of $0.22 per liter. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-31; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-31), 2-26-2007) 
Sec. 4-86. - Reports. 
Each wholesaler selling malt beverages and wine within the city shall file a report with the city clerk by the 20th day of each month which shall include the payment of the excise taxes showing for the preceding calendar month. The report shall provide the exact quantities of each type of malt beverage or wine (by size and type of container), constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month, sold within the city for each licensed dealer. Forms and/or sample forms may be furnished by the city clerk to ensure proper formatting for the proper collection of information. Licensed dealers shall furnish copies of their sales tax and excise tax reports as submitted to the state department of revenue to the city clerk with payment to the city by the 20th of each month for the excise tax for the preceding calendar month. Other forms or reports may be required of licensed dealers upon written notice from the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3-32; Ord. No. 01-002-2007, § 1(7-3-32), 2-26-2007) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals generally, O.C.G.A. title 4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means a code enforcement officer or his designee or other individual selected by the city to aid in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
At large means an animal that is not confined or contained in an enclosure, structure, housing, pen and/or fenced area. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this chapter. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a potentially dangerous dog in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this chapter. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as a dangerous dog or vicious dog in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this chapter. 
Confined means in an enclosure or secured by a leash which shall have a length not more than four times the length of the animal, and which shall be free from obstructions. All domestic animals shall be provided with sanitary shelter from the elements and with water at all times. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dog control officer means a code enforcement officer or his designee or other individual selected by the city to aid in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Domestic animal means any dog, cat, or other legally owned animal not defined as wildlife, livestock, or nontraditional livestock. 
Enclosure means in a building, pen or fenced area or other structure built to prevent intrusion or escape by any dog or other animal. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which the dog is located. 
Livestock means cattle, swine, equines, poultry, sheep, goats, ratites, nontraditional livestock and ruminants. 
Nontraditional livestock means the species of Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates) listed as bison, water buffalo, farmed deer, llamas and alpacas that are held and possessed legally and in a manner which is not in conflict with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 27, ch. 5 relating to wild animals. 
Owner means any person who owns, keeps, harbors, possesses, or has custody or control of any domestic, nontraditional livestock or livestock animal, or any person who knowingly permits any domestic, nontraditional livestock or livestock animal to be kept, harbored, possessed, or otherwise kept upon his premises, or who has any animal under his care or responsibility, either temporarily or permanently, at any time, within the city. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any adult at whose residence an animal is kept or found shall be presumed to be an owner of such animal and shall have the burden of rebutting such presumption. If an animal has more than one owner, any one of such owners may be prosecuted for violations of this chapter whether or not any other owners are also prosecuted. In relation to dangerous or vicious dogs, the term "owner" means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dog while on the owner's property in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, or, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. The structure shall further provide appropriate protection from the elements for the dog. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Under control means any animal that is controlled by a leash when off the property of the owner, or is within the passenger area of a vehicle driven or parked on the streets, or is within the property limits of its owner and is confined or attended by its owner, or confined within the property limits of another with the permission of the person in control of the property. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
Wildlife means any vertebrate or invertebrate animal life indigenous to the state or any species introduced or specified by the department of natural resources, including, but not limited to, fish (except domestic fish produced by an aquaculturist registered under O.C.G.A. § 27-4-255), mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans and mollusks. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-1; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-1), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-2. - Bird sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, kill, shoot or attempt to shoot, or molest in any manner any wild bird or fowl or remove eggs from a bird's nest or fowl's nest; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the county, such birds may be destroyed as humanely as possible in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the animal control officer. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-2; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-2), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-3. - Abuse of animals. 
The animal control officer shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq., entitled "the Georgia Animal Protection Act." 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-14; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-14), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-4. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, kill, shoot or attempt to shoot, or molest in any manner any wildlife in the corporate limits of the city except by order of the chief of police. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-3; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-3), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-5. - Fowl and livestock running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any hog, cattle, mule, sheep, goat, fowl or any other livestock or nontraditional livestock to permit said animal to run at large in the corporate limits of the city or to stray from the property of the owner or keeper or to go upon the premises of any other person. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-4; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-4), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-6. - Enclosures for animals and fowl. 
Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of animals or fowl shall be properly drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-5; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-5), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-7. - Leash law. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner not to have his domestic animal under control, as defined in this chapter. All domestic animals shall be controlled by a leash unless: 
(1)  The domestic animal is contained within a properly ventilated passenger area of a vehicle driven or parked on the streets; 
(2)  The domestic animal is within the property limits of its owner and is confined or attended to by its owner; 
(3)  The domestic animal is confined within the property limits of another with the permission of the person in control of the property. 
(b)  Any leash shall have a length not more than four times the length of the domestic animal. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-6; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-6), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-8. - Animals in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a domestic animal into the confines of any park located in the city that is not on a leash and under the direct control of its owner or keeper, as the term "under control" is defined in this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-7; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-7), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-9. - Prohibitions for domestic animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a domestic animal under his ownership or possession to do the following: 
(1)  Travel upon the property of any person other than its owner or keeper without the express consent of such other owner or occupant; 
(2)  Attack or act so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways or on the property of another; 
(3)  Disturb the peace of any other person or neighbor by loud, persistent, habitual barking, howling, growling, yelping, or whining; 
(4)  Defecate or urinate upon the property of another; 
(5)  Be in heat and not be confined in an enclosure on the property of its owner or keeper. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section, in addition to the penalties provided for within this chapter, shall be required to maintain the domestic animal in a proper enclosure, as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  No person shall be charged with violating subsection (a)(3) of this section unless written warning has previously been issued to the owner by the animal control officer within 60 days of the charged violation. 
(d)  No citation for violation of this section shall be issued unless there are at least two complaining witnesses who shall have signed a written statement stating the address of the animal owner, a description of the animal and of the offense and the date, time and location of the offense. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-8; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-8), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-10. - Removal of animal wastes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to refuse or fail to immediately remove any feces deposited by such animal upon public sidewalks, public streets, public parks or other public property in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on private property within the city any animal excrement. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-9; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-9), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-11. - Guard dogs. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or tenant of any commercial property on which a guard dog is kept for security purposes to post a notice in a prominent and conspicuous location on such property. Such notice shall comprise the words "Warning Guard Dog" and shall be in clearly contrasting color. Such letters shall be not less than one inch in width and not less than five inches in height. If a guard dog is confined within a fenced area, such notice shall be conspicuously posted upon such fence at every entrance and exit of the fenced area. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-10; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-10), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-12. - Identification and inoculation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation and any such dog or cat shall wear at all times a securely attached collar about its neck with vaccination identification (e.g., metal or plastic tags or microchips) to allow for verification of rabies vaccination status and a proper identification tag. The identification tag shall list the owner's name and address. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-11; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-11), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-13. - No animal giveaway. 
No person in the city shall give away any live domestic animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-12; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-12), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-14. - Injured animals. 
The animal control officer shall have the authority to humanely dispose of impounded animals if, in the opinion of a licensed accredited veterinarian or a veterinarian employed by a state or federal government and approved by the commissioner of agriculture of the state, such animal has a temperament or condition such that euthanasia is the only reasonable course of action, and no determination as to the owner can be made with a reasonable inquiry or investigation. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-18; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-18), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-15. - Impoundment of animals. 
Except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the state, any domestic animal, nontraditional livestock or livestock that is in violation of this chapter, whether or not the animal is on public or private property, may be, but is not required to be, impounded by the animal control officer or officers of the city police department in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-19; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-19), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-16. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall be authorized to dispose of any animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible if such animal has remained unclaimed for five days after impoundment and the animal has not been adopted after impoundment. If possible, the animal control officer may donate any unclaimed animal to a nonprofit institution or agency for the purpose of humane placement or rescue. 
(b)  No live animal in the possession of the animal control officer shall be released, sold or given to any individual, institution, or private firm for the purposes of medical and scientific research. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-20; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-20), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-17. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
It shall be the responsibility of the animal control officer to attempt to notify the owner, if known, or can be reasonably ascertained, of the animal impounded, by telephone if possible, or by mail or by written notice at the residence of the owner within three business days of the impoundment. The owner of the animal may claim and take custody of the animal within five days of such impoundment by the payment of required fees and the cost of inoculations and veterinary services. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-22; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-22), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-18. - Escape, injury or theft. 
Employees of the city shall exercise reasonable care to prevent the injury, escape or theft of any animal which is in their custody or which they are attempting to bring into their custody under the provisions of this chapter, but they shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-23; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-23), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-19. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep written records showing the final disposition of all animals impounded thereby, the date of impoundment, the description and other identifying data of the animal, the fees collected, the disposition of the animal and the date thereof. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-24; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-24), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-20. - Power to issue citations. 
Officers of the city police department and the animal control officer are hereby authorized to issue a summons relative to the enforcement of the chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-17; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-17), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-21. - Obstruction of officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of any officer of the city in the official performance of his duties as provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to relocate, interfere with, or alter the operation of any device, equipment, or item of the animal control officer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place their own animal into or remove any animal confined within a trap or cage operated by the animal control officer. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false name, address or date of birth to any officer, employee or agent of the city in the lawful discharge of his official duties with the intent to mislead such officer, employee or agent in any way. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-13; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-13), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-22. - Fees. 
(a)  Except as provided by section 6-77, any person reclaiming a neutered male dog, spayed female dog, or any other animal shall pay a $25.00 impoundment fee for the first impoundment, $30.00 for the second impoundment and $35.00 for each subsequent impoundment. In addition to the above, $10.00 per day will be charged for boarding plus the cost of inoculations and/or veterinary services. 
(b)  Except as provided by section 6-77, any person reclaiming an unneutered male or unspayed female dog shall pay $50.00 for the first impoundment, $75.00 for the second impoundment and $100.00 for each subsequent impoundment. In addition to the above, $10.00 per day will be charged for boarding plus the cost of inoculations and/or veterinary services. 
(c)  There shall be a registration fee of $100.00 for all dangerous dogs and vicious dogs in the city. Such registration is to be renewed on an annual basis. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-15; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-15), 9-14-2004) 
Secs. 6-23—6-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-48. - Confinement of biting animals. 
(a)  Any animal that is known to have bitten or scratched a person shall be confined for the purpose of rabies observation to an animal control facility, a veterinary facility or to such other facility as may be directed by the animal control officer for a period of ten days after the date of the bite or scratch. All expenses incurred for such confinement and observation shall be paid by the owner of such animal. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall be authorized to order the owner of any dog that is known to have bitten a person to submit the dog for rabies observation to an animal control facility, a veterinary facility or to such other facility as may be approved by the animal control officer. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-21; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-21), 9-14-2004) 
Secs. 6-49—6-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-70. - Title and purpose; dangerous dog control. 
The purpose of this division shall be to implement the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., the "Responsible Dog Ownership Law." 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-25; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-25), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-71. - Exceptions. 
No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 5. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-26; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-26), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-72. - Classification as dangerous dog or vicious dog; notice to owner. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(b)  When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the mayor and city council on the dog control officer's determination within seven days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of a dog control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the dog control officer. 
(c)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the mayor and city council for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city clerk shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the mayor and city council conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(d)  Within ten days after the hearing, the city clerk shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. The findings of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-27; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-27), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-73. - Requirements for possession of dangerous or vicious dog. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsections (e) and (f) of this section, a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(d)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(e)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(f)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-28; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-28), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-74. - Transfer of ownership or possession. 
Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous dog or vicious dog, the transferor shall provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone numbers of the new owner of the dog and of the effective date of the transfer. Any transferee of a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be presumed to have notice of the dog's classification as such. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-30; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-30), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-75. - Notice to dog control officer. 
(a)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(b)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(c)  The owner of a classified dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the classified dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into this state shall register the dog as required in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-31; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-31), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-76. - Restraints when outside proper enclosure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)  The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; 
(2)  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)  The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)  Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a.  The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
b.  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(2)  Unattended with minors. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-32; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-32), 9-14-2004) 
Sec. 6-77. - Confiscation and disposition of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  A dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of sections 6-73 through 6-77. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this section. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this section may recover such dog upon payment of all reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, unless such confiscation is deemed to be in error by a dog control officer, or the mayor and city council. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(c)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 14 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be released to an animal shelter, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2, or euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Code 2002, § 9-4-33; Ord. No. 001-009-2004, § 1(9-4-33), 9-14-2004) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Building codes generally, O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Office of building inspector created. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established the office of building inspector who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The building inspector shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of the standard codes adopted by this chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto and shall perform other duties as may be prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 6-2-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Right of entry. 
The building inspector or his designee in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of conducting inspections pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 6-2-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Applicability of provisions to home owners. 
Nothing contained within this chapter shall prevent any home owner from installing or maintaining electrical wiring or plumbing, gas piping or gas appliances within his own property boundaries, provided the electrical, plumbing or gas work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him or his family. This privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this chapter; nor is it to be construed as exempting any property owner from obtaining a permit and having the work inspected or from paying the required fees therefore. 
(Code 2002, §§ 6-2-22, 6-2-42) 
Sec. 8-4. - Permits. 
Before any construction, alteration, use, demolition and removal of buildings or other structures, or any appurtenances connected or attached thereto; any electrical wiring, devices or equipment are installed, repaired or altered in any building or structure within the city; any installation or repair of gas work; any installation of all plumbing, including the pipes for distributing the water supply, the fixtures for using water and the drainage pipe for removing waste water and sewage, together with fittings and appurtenances of various kinds, all within or adjacent to the buildings within the city or where connected to the city's water or sewage system, and the whole thereof, the person or company making the installation, repair or alteration shall obtain a permit from the building inspector. 
(Code 2002, § 6-2-23) 
Sec. 8-5. - Permit fees. 
On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as determined by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 2002, § 6-2-24) 
Sec. 8-6. - Inspections. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed, in such manner that the inspector cannot satisfy himself that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, any work until after the work has been inspected and approved by the inspector. 
(Code 2002, § 6-2-25) 
Secs. 8-7—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 8-31. - Adoption. 
(a)  The state minimum standard codes enumerated in or promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I) through (VIII), as now or hereafter modified or altered pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(ii), are adopted. 
(b)  In addition, the following code is adopted: The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-200 through 8-2-222. 
(Ord. No. 01-006-2010, § 1.0, 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 8-32. - Administration; enforcement official. 
The administration of the codes adopted in section 8-31 will be accomplished in accordance with the administration chapter of each code. Wherever in any of the above-stated codes reference is made to the powers, authorities or duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has the powers, authorities or duties corresponding to those of the official named in said code shall be deemed to be the official named in said code with said powers, authorities or duties. 
(Ord. No. 01-006-2010, § 2.0, 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 8-33. - Conflicting provisions. 
Any matters in the codes adopted in this article which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail over such ordinances to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 01-006-2010, § 4.0, 6-8-2010) 
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Election officials. 
The city clerk is hereby appointed chief registrar and superintendent of elections, to serve in both capacities at the will of the mayor and council. The clerk may receive additional compensation for his services in either capacity at the direction of the mayor and city council. The clerk's powers and duties shall be all of those set forth for those positions in the Georgia Election Code. 
(Code 2002, § 2-2-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Voter registration. 
Voter registration shall be as set forth in the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
(Code 2002, § 2-2-2) 
State Law reference— Voter registration, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-224. 
Sec. 10-3. - Notice of candidacy; filing dates. 
Notices of candidacy shall be filed as set forth in the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
(Code 2002, § 2-2-3) 
Sec. 10-4. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be $144.00 for the office of mayor and $72.00 for the office of city councilmember, which fees shall be received by the municipal election superintendent at the time of filing the notice of candidacy and paid over to the city. 
(Code 2002, § 2-2-4) 
State Law reference— Qualification fees, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
Sec. 10-5. - Election district; polling place. 
The city shall constitute one, and only one, election district. The polling place shall be the community house at 101 McNair Street in the City of Wrens. 
(Code 2002, § 2-2-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - Plurality determines. 
All candidates shall be elected by a plurality of the votes cast. 
(Code 2002, § 2-2-6) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY SERVICES/MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-20 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Adoption of system. 
The city hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as the city's system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations under the jurisdiction of the city to train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. No. 02-009-2006, § I, 9-12-2006) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-19. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "City of Wrens Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-1; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-1, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-1), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means and includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Brier Creek, Region 6 Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 14-22(c). 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscaped areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 14-21(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia ("manual") published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Brier Creek, Region 6 Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-2; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-2, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-2), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 14-22(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1, except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-3; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-3, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-3), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15), (16) and (17) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  a.  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-2-280 et seq., the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except: 
1.  Where the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; 
2.  Where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8; 
3.  Where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286; 
4.  For maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
5.  Where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
6.  On the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure; and 
7.  For the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
8.  For the purpose of this subsection maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
b.  No land-disturbing activity shall be conducted within any such buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed, except as otherwise provided by this subsection. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation so long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time so long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
c.  The buffer requirements of this subsection (17) shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  The buffer shall not apply to: 
1.  Any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; or 
2.  Any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
3.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-4; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-4, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-4), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-23. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the unified development ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city building inspector to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city building inspector and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 14-22(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division, except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 14-22(c)(15) and (16) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, has been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 14-22(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary, and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 14-22(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract of land is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-5; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-5, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-5), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city building inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city building inspector shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to any municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the municipality in writing. The governing authority of any municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-6; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-6, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-6), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his occupation tax certificate, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 14-23(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in the city's Charter to the contrary, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of city ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under city ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. 
(3)  Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-7; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-7, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-7), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-26. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-8; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-8, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-8), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-27. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city's planning and zoning commission within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Jefferson County. 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-8; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-9, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-9), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 14-28. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Code 2002, § 6-7-9; Ord. No. 02-004-2004, § 6-7-10, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 001-005-2013, § 1(6-7-10), 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2017-04-01 , §§ 2, 3, 4-4-2017) 
Secs. 14-29—14-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 14-60. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Code 2002, § 3-4-1) 
Sec. 14-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Code 2002, § 3-4-2) 
Sec. 14-62. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 2,500 feet. 
(Code 2002, § 3-4-3) 
Sec. 14-63. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Code 2002, § 3-4-4) 
Sec. 14-64. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as apart of a use permitted under section 14-63: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 14-63; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Code 2002, § 3-4-5) 
Sec. 14-65. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including, without limitation, those applicable to non-conforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing unified development ordinance for the city as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 2002, § 3-4-6) 
Secs. 14-66—14-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 14-89. - Title; findings; and objectives. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known as the "Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance of the City of Wrens, Georgia." 
(b)  Findings of fact. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(c)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and 
(3)  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Code 2002, § 3-5-1) 
Sec. 14-90. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas, 1989 edition. 
(Code 2002, § 3-5-2) 
Sec. 14-91. - Pollution susceptibility. 
All recharge areas within the city have a medium pollution susceptibility, as indicated by the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map prepared by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 2002, § 3-5-3) 
Sec. 14-92. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
No building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plan will be approved by the city unless the permit, request, or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in section 14-93. 
(1)  Enforcement. The mayor and council of the city, its agents, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city deems necessary. 
a.  The zoning officer is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement officer for this article. 
b.  The zoning officer shall have authority to enforce this article, issue permits hereunder, and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
c.  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the zoning officer in enforcement. 
d.  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $100.00 for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
e.  The zoning officer shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in section 14-94. 
f.  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
g.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(2)  Permit review and site plan requirement. With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in subsection (3) of this section, applications for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan. The following information is required for all site plans: 
a.  A map or maps, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or other approved scale, showing all planned improvements, including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways, water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and utility installations, shall be provided by the applicant. 
b.  Location, dimensions and areas of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
c.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
d.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
e.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
f.  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. 
g.  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the zoning officer. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alternations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(3)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
a.  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
b.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
c.  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(4)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the zoning officer and will be reviewed within 45 days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions or disapproval) by the zoning officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the zoning officer. If the review process is not completed within 45 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the zoning officer may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
(5)  Public notice and public hearing. Public notice of permit applications, through publication in local newspapers, is required. A public hearing on the application, to be held before the mayor and council of the city, may be scheduled if requested by a citizen. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 14 days prior to the hearing. A record of the proceedings shall be made and kept on file by the city. Any person may testify at the hearing. Decisions of the city may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction identified in section 14-94. 
(6)  Duration of permit validity. 
a.  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
b.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
c.  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the zoning officer. 
(Code 2002, § 3-5-4) 
Sec. 14-93. - Groundwater protection standards. 
(a)  Waste disposal facilities and synthetic liners. For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(b)  Requirements for agricultural compounds. New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 area-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(c)  Hazardous waste disposal facilities. No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(d)  Hazardous waste handling and storage. New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(e)  Above-ground chemical and petroleum storage tanks. For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks having a minimum of 660 gallons must have secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. 
(f)  Wastewater treatment facilities. For high pollution susceptibility areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD. 
(g)  Stormwater infiltration basins. For high pollution susceptibility areas, no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed. 
(h)  Wastewater spray irrigation systems. For high pollution susceptibility areas, wastewater spray irrigation systems or the land spreading of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with department of natural resources criteria for slow rate land treatment. An application for a development permit for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land spreading of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit from EPD. 
(i)  Minimum lot sizes for new homes. New homes served by septic tank/drain systems shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the department of human resources' (DHR) Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR Table MT-1") The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
(3)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(j)  Minimum lot sizes for new mobile home parks. New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the department of human resources' (DHR) manual for on-site sewage management systems (hereinafter "DHR Table MR-2"). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
(3)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(k)  Construction on building or mobile home served by septic tanks. No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by septic tanks unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the state department of human resources for on-site sewage management (hereinafter DHR Manual), and subsections (i) and (j) of this section. 
(Code 2002, § 3-5-5) 
Sec. 14-94. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the mayor and council concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the zoning officer may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement of fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the zoning officer. 
(Code 2002, § 3-5-6) 
Sec. 14-95. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 2002, § 3-5-8) 
Secs. 14-96—14-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 14-119. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address means the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. 
(1)  The term "even-numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. 
(2)  The term "odd-numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Code 2002, § 5-5-1; Ord. No. 03-007-2004, § 1(5-5-1), 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 002-005-2013, § 1(5-5-1), 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 14-120. - Applicability of article. 
The rules provided for in this article apply to any entity, and its customers, permitted by the state environmental protection division (EPD) for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(Code 2002, § 5-5-2; Ord. No. 03-007-2004, § 1(5-5-2), 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 002-005-2013, § 1(5-5-2), 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 14-121. - Outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods. 
(a)  Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: 
(1)  Odd-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Even-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(b)  During non-drought periods, outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(Code 2002, § 5-5-3; Ord. No. 03-007-2004, § 1(5-5-3), 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 002-005-2013, § 1(5-5-3), 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 14-122. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response. 
During declared drought conditions by the director of the state environmental protection division, outdoor water use other than activities exempted in section 14-123, shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(1)  Declared Drought Response Level One. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
c.  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(2)  Declared Drought Response Level Two. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
c.  The following uses are prohibited: 
1.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
2.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(3)  Declared Drought Response Level Three. Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
b.  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
c.  The following uses are prohibited: 
1.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
2.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
3.  Filling installed swimming pools, except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. 
4.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, trucks, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
5.  Washing buildings or structures, except for immediate fire protection. 
6.  Non-commercial fundraisers, such as car washes. 
7.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls, except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(4)  Declared Drought Response Level Four. No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in section 14-123, or as the EPD director may order. 
(Code 2002, § 5-5-4; Ord. No. 03-007-2004, § 1(5-5-4), 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 002-005-2013, § 1(5-5-4), 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 14-123. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(3)  Outdoor irrigation using water obtained exclusively from a private well. 
(b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(3)  Drip and soaker hose irrigation systems. 
(4)  Hand watering with a hose that has an automatic cutoff nozzle, or with hand-held containers. 
(c)  Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
(1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during Drought Response Level Four. 
(2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and Declared Drought Response Level One. 
(3)  Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and Declared Drought Response Levels One, Two and Three. 
(4)  Irrigation of greens. 
(e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(2)  Irrigation contractors during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
(3)  Sod producers. 
(4)  Ornamental growers. 
(5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
(6)  Retail garden centers. 
(7)  Hydro-seeding. 
(8)  Power-washing. 
(9)  Construction sites. 
(10)  Producers of food and fiber. 
(11)  Car washes. 
(12)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(13)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Code 2002, § 5-5-5; Ord. No. 03-007-2004, § 1(5-5-5), 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 002-005-2013, § 1(5-5-5), 5-7-2013) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Obstruction of public administration and related offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20 et seq.; damage to and intrusion upon property, O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 7; prescribed burning, O.C.G.A. title 12, ch. 6; fire department, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Outdoor burning. 
(a)  Outdoor burning of household domestic garbage, refuse, rubbish, tires and trash is prohibited within the city limits. 
(b)  Outdoor burning of building materials on construction sites is prohibited within the city limits. 
(c)  For any fires found in violation of this section, the police chief, fire chief or building inspector shall direct the extinguishment of the fire. 
(d)  The following activities are exempt from the prohibition contained in this section: 
(1)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops. Georgia Forestry Burn Permit required. 
(2)  Fires for recreational purposes (e.g., campfires) or for cooking food for immediate human consumption. 
(3)  Fires set for purposes of training firefighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental authority. 
(4)  Operation of devices using open flames, such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment. 
(5)  Outdoor burning, on the premises of origin, of yard waste, leaves, pine straw, pine cones, trees, logs, wood, brush, grass clippings, stumps, branches, and land clearing debris such as stumps, limbs, leaves. Georgia Forestry Burn Permit required. 
(6)  Prescribed burning and slash burning. Georgia Forestry Burn Permit required. 
(e)  Each day of a continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct violation and may be so punished. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-10; Ord. No. 03-009-2010, § 1(9-1-10), 9-14-2010; Ord. No. 2017-11-01 , § 2, 11-7-2017) 
Sec. 16-2. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly enrolled member of the fire department shall ride upon the fire trucks of the city at any time, nor use, borrow or interfere with any fire department equipment, or attempt to use the equipment at the scene of a fire unless authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 2002, § 3-2-2) 
Sec. 16-3. - Enforcement. 
Whenever the fire department is answering an alarm or operating at the scene of a fire or other emergency every active member of the department is hereby empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all provisions of this chapter and any other code provisions the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to assist in the control of the fire or other emergency. 
(Code 2002, § 3-2-3) 
Sec. 16-4. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 3-2-4) 
Sec. 16-5. - Fire limits defined. 
The fire limits of the city are hereby defined as all that area within the city limits, as those limits now exist, or as they may hereafter be amended. 
(Code 2002, § 3-2-22) 
Secs. 16-6—16-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE (RESERVED) 

Secs. 16-29—16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 16-60. - Fire chief and members. 
The fire department shall be headed by a fire chief and shall be composed of such other paid and volunteer members and employees as may be determined necessary by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 16-61. - Volunteers covered by workers' compensation. 
Volunteer firefighters who are active members of the fire department of the city are hereby extended coverage for workers' compensation insurance in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 
(Code 2002, § 3-2-5) 
Chapter 18 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 18-21(b). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before June 17, 1986. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 7, 1974. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. The term "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after June 17, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after October 7, 1974, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after October 7, 1974. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. The term "permanent construction" does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. The market value of the structure should be: 
a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: 
a.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the building inspector, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Code 2002, § 6-4-7; Ord. No. 002-009-2010, § 3(6-4-6), 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-20. - Statutory authorization, findings of facts, purpose and objective. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The Constitution of the State of Georgia, Article IX, Section II delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council do ordain the following. 
(b)  Findings of facts. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 2002, § 6-4-1; Ord. No. 002-009-2010, § 3(6-4-1), 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-21. - General provisions. 
(a)  Areas covered by article. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(1)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference herein and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(3)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the office of the building inspector of the city. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another law conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-9 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 2002, § 6-4-2; Ord. No. 002-009-2010, § 3(6-4-2), 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-22. - Administration. 
(a)  Building inspector to administer. The city building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the building inspector on forms furnished by the city prior to any development activities, and may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of this article; 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the building inspector an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building inspector shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the building inspector shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-21(b), then the building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of section 18-23. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building inspector shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection (b)(1)c of this section and section 18-23(b)(2) or (d)(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse: 
a.  Submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process; 
b.  Ensure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the building inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the building inspector's interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 2002, § 6-4-3; Ord. No. 002-009-2010, § 3(6-4-3), 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-23. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section, elevated buildings. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 18-22(c)(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See subsection (a)(6) of this section.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (b)(3)a and c of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-21(b), are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (b)(4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-21(b), where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-21(b), then the building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this section. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (c)(2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (The lowest floor shall be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section, elevated buildings. 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
b.  The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-21(b), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction of substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-21(b) may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section, elevated buildings. The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the building inspector as set forth above and as required in section 18-22(b)(1)c and (b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(g)  Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facilities must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Code 2002, § 6-4-4; Ord. No. 002-009-2010, § 3(6-4-4), 9-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-24. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning commission as established by the mayor and city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the mayor and city council. The decision of the mayor and city council may be appealed to superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 6-4-6; Ord. No. 002-009-2010, § 3(6-4-5), 9-14-2010) 
Chapter 20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 20-19. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 20-20. - Responsibilities. 
The department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 3-1-2) 
Chapter 22 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-8-1 et seq.; bonds, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Created; presiding officer. 
(a)  There is hereby created a municipal court for the trial of the offenses and offenders against the laws and ordinances of the city. The municipal court shall be presided over by the municipal court judge. The municipal court judge shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The judge's salary shall be fixed by the mayor and council, and the judge shall take such oath as may be prescribed by the mayor and council. The judge shall be subject to removal, with or without any stated cause, upon a majority vote by the mayor and council. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to provide for the appointment of an associate municipal judge to serve in the absence or disability of the municipal court judge, and to provide such salary and/or remuneration as they deem appropriate. 
(d)  Any vacancy in the office of the municipal court judge by reason of death, resignation, removal or other reason shall be filled by appointment of the mayor and council. In his disqualification or absence, the associate municipal court judge may hold the court, and may exercise all the powers conferred by law or this chapter upon the judge. 
Sec. 22-2. - Warrants; form, scope, execution; judge's authority to hear evidence, grant bond. 
(a)  The judge shall be authorized to issue warrants for any offense under any law or ordinance of the city or this state and when the offense is against state laws and not covered by municipal law or ordinance, may hear evidence and commit to jail or take bond for appearance before the grand jury or a state court having jurisdiction to try the same. If the offense charged in the warrant to be one against any law or ordinance of the city, the arresting officer shall carry the same before the municipal court, where same shall be disposed of as other cases of arrest not under warrant. 
(b)  All warrants issued by the judge, or the municipal court, shall be directed to the "Chief of Police of the City of Wrens, any policeman or marshal thereof, and to all and singular the sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, and constables of the State of Georgia," and any one of said officers shall have the authority to execute warrants. 
(c)  The municipal court judge or associate municipal judge shall have the right and authority to sign all warrants, summonses, receipts, executions or other processes, which the judge of the municipal court has authority to sign, when the judge of the municipal court is absent, incapacitated, or in any way unavailable, provided such warrants, summonses, receipts, executions, or other processes are returnable only to the judge of the municipal court. 
Sec. 22-3. - Witnesses. 
The judge or any officer of the municipal court authorized by ordinance shall have power and authority to subpoena witnesses to attend the municipal court, under the same rules and regulations that regulate and govern the superior courts of this state, to compel attendance, and to punish any witness who has been duly subpoenaed and fails to attend, under the provisions heretofore, provided for contempt. 
Sec. 22-4. - Ministerial officers; attendances, duties. 
The ministerial officers of the municipal court shall be the police officers of the city to whom all means and final processes shall be directed. Officers of a sufficient number shall attend the sessions of the court for the purpose of executing the orders of said court, and shall do and perform such duties connected with the court as may be required of them. 
Chapter 24 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Declaration of nuisance. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections in the city; 
(12)  Littering resulting from discard of waste materials and/or scraps upon city property or rights-of-way or upon the property of citizens within the city; 
(13)  Any unfit or dilapidated building or structure (see article III of this chapter); 
(14)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-2) 
Sec. 24-3. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within a designated period as the recorder shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, code enforcement officers, building inspectors and the director of public works shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 24-4. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police in such case shall keep record of the expense and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection in the same manner as for city property taxes. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 24-5. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 24-6. - Offense; penalty. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2002, § 9-2-6) 
Secs. 24-7—24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRASH REGULATION 

Sec. 24-31. - Title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "City of Wrens Trash Regulation Ordinance." 
(Code 2002, § 9-3-1) 
Sec. 24-32. - Purpose. 
(a)  In the city, an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions exist which create a health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. Such conditions tend to interfere with the enjoyment of and reduce the value of private property; create safety and health hazards to children as well as adults; and interfere with the comfort and welfare of the public. 
(b)  This article is adopted for the physical and economic growth of the city as will best promote the public health, morals, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and for the purpose of protecting the public. Adequate protection of the public health, safety and welfare requires that such conditions be regulated, removed, abated or prohibited. 
(Code 2002, § 9-3-2) 
Sec. 24-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Governing body means the mayor and city council of the city. 
Parties in interest means the persons in possession of said property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building, or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by the governing body of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 9-3-3) 
Sec. 24-34. - Unlawful accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
No owner of any vacant lot or parcel of land in the city, whether for business, industrial, or residential use, shall allow an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions creating a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing within the vicinity; nor shall any lot owner permit or allow grass, weeds, vines, underbrush, or other growth to grow or accumulate thereon, or on the area between the lot or parcel of land and the street curb, so as to constitute an unclean, unhealthy, unsanitary, unsightly, filthy, dangerous, objectionable, or offensive condition. 
(Code 2002, § 9-3-4) 
Sec. 24-35. - Unlawful dumping of debris. 
No owner of any vacant lot or parcel of land in the city, whether for business, industrial, or commercial use, shall permit or allow debris to be dumped or allow old lumber and building material to be piled thereon. 
(Code 2002, § 9-3-5) 
Sec. 24-36. - Abatement. 
Whenever the public officer discovers that the provisions of section 24-34 or 24-35 are being violated, he shall give the owner, his agent or other representative, and any other parties in interest, written notice by mail, directed to the last known address as maintained on the city property records, that the condition shall be remedied within 30 days; and if, after the expiration of the 30 days the condition is not remedied, the public officer shall cause the work to be done and tax the cost of the work against the owner and the property. The cost shall constitute a lien against the property, and the city clerk shall issue a fi. fa. in the name of the city, acting by and through the mayor and council, for the cost, and levy the fi. fa. upon, and expose for sale, the property in a manner consistent with the laws of the state. 
(Code 2002, § 9-3-6) 
Sec. 24-37. - Penalties. 
Each day such violation is committed or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 2002, § 9-3-7) 
Secs. 24-38—24-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 24-63. - Findings. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city find and declare that within the city limits there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 3-7-1) 
Sec. 24-64. - Title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "City of Wrens Unfit Buildings or Structures Regulation/Nuisance Abatement Procedure Ordinance." 
(Code 2002, § 3-8-1) 
Sec. 24-65. - Continued use; definitions. 
(a)  Continued use of other laws and ordinances. It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable code means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the city. 
Interested parties. 
(1)  The term "interested parties" means: 
a.  Owner; 
b.  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
c.  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
d.  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the governing authority or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the county superior court; and 
e.  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
(2)  The term "interested parties" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or city. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Code 2002, § 3-8-2; Ord. No. 002-002-2011, §§ I, II, 2-8-2011) 
Sec. 24-66. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful; hearing; liens. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The governing authority appoints and designates the building inspector of the city and his designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(d)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(e)  The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(f)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(g)  For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39a, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(h)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(i)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(j)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(k)  The lien provided for in subsection (j) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of the county superior court and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 24-69(c). The clerk of the county superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of whose lien is being collected. 
(l)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(m)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section, together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(n)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(o)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court of the county, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(p)  In addition to the procedures and remedies provided herein, the governing authority may designate public officers to issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(q)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Code 2002, § 3-8-3; Ord. No. 002-002-2011, § III, 2-8-2011) 
Sec. 24-67. - Determination by public officer that dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and/or unfit. 
(a)  The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted by the governing authority. 
(b)  The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Code 2002, § 3-8-4) 
Sec. 24-68. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate; and 
(6)  To perform those acts as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 3-8-5; Ord. No. 002-002-2011, § IV, 2-8-2011) 
Sec. 24-69. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the county superior court at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Code 2002, § 3-8-6; Ord. No. 002-002-2011, § V, 2-8-2011) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State criminal code, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Shoplifting. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14 are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Code as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-8) 
Sec. 26-2. - Theft of utility services. 
(a)  A person is guilty of theft of a utility, cable television service or satellite television service if the person commits any prohibited acts which make gas, electricity, water, sewer, cable television or satellite television available to a tenant or occupant, including himself, with intent to avoid due payment to the utility, cable television provider or satellite television provider. Prohibited acts include: 
(1)  Connecting any tube, pipe, wire, cable, dish or other instrument with any meter, device, or other instrument used for conducting gas, electricity, water, sewer, or television service in a manner as permits the use of the gas, electricity, water, sewer, cable television or satellite television without its passing through a meter or other instrument recording the usage for billing; 
(2)  Altering, injuring, or preventing the normal action of a meter, valve, stopcock, or other instrument used for measuring quantities of gas, electricity, water, or sewer service, or making or maintaining any modification or alteration to any device installed with the authorization of a cable or satellite television company for the purpose of intercepting or receiving any program or other service carried by the company which the person is not authorized by the company to receive; 
(3)  Reconnecting gas, electricity, water, sewer, cable television or satellite television connections or otherwise restoring service when one or more of those utilities or service have been lawfully disconnected or turned off by the provider of the utility, cable service or satellite service; 
(4)  Intentionally breaking, defacing, or causing to be broken or defaced any seal, locking device, or other part of a metering device for recording usage of gas, electricity, water, or sewer service, or a security system for the recording device, or a cable television or satellite television control device; 
(5)  Removing a metering device designed to measure quantities of gas, electricity, water, or sewer service; 
(6)  Transferring from one location to another a metering device for measuring quantities of gas, electricity, water, or sewer service without receiving permission from the company or provider; 
(7)  Changing the indicated consumption, jamming the measuring device, bypassing the meter or measuring device with a jumper so that it does not indicate use or registers use incorrectly, or otherwise obtaining quantities of gas, electricity, water, or sewer service from the utility without their passing through a metering device for measuring quantities of consumption for billing purposes; 
(8)  Using a metering device belonging to the utility that has not been assigned to the location and installed by the utility; 
(9)  Fabricating or using a device to pick or otherwise tamper with the locks used to deter utility service diversion, meter tampering, meter thefts, and unauthorized cable or satellite television service; 
(10)  Assisting or instructing any person in obtaining or attempting to obtain any cable or satellite television service without payment of all lawful compensation to the company providing the service; 
(11)  Making or maintaining a connection or connections, whether physical, electrical, mechanical, acoustical, or by other means, with any cables, wires, components, or other devices used for the distribution of cable or satellite television service without authority from the cable or satellite television company; or 
(12)  Possessing without authority any device or printed circuit board designed in whole or in part to receive any cable or satellite television programming or services offered for sale over a cable or satellite television system with the intent that the device or printed circuit board be used for the reception of the cable or satellite television company's services without payment. For purposes of this subsection, the term "device or printed circuit board" does not include the use of an authorized satellite dish or antenna. 
(b)  The presence of any device or alteration on property in possession of a person which permits the diversion or use of utility, cable service or satellite service to avoid the registration of use by or on a meter installed by the utility or to otherwise avoid the recording of use of the service for payment or otherwise avoid payment gives rise to an inference that the person in possession of the property installed the device or caused the alteration if: 
(1)  The presence of the device or alteration can be attributed only to a deliberate act in furtherance of an intent to avoid payment for utility, cable television or satellite television service; and 
(2)  The person charged has received the direct benefit of the reduction of the cost of the utility, cable television service or satellite television service. 
(c)  City fire hydrants are not to be operated by any person for any reason without written authorization from the city administrator or as authorized by the fire chief. No person shall connect any pipe, tube, hose or other instrument to any water main, water storage tank, service pipe or fire hydrant belonging to the city for the purpose of withdrawing or using water without obtaining written authorization from the city administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 001-004-2012, § 1(9-1-11), 4-3-2012) 
Sec. 26-3. - Wearing of pants below the waist in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of age, to appear in any public place or in view of the public wearing pants or shorts more than three inches below the waist (crest of the ilium) causing exposure of the person's skin or the person's undergarments. 
(b)  Any violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be cited by the law enforcement officer by the issuance of a citation and summons to appear before a court of proper jurisdiction, and shall not, in and of itself, be grounds for an arrest or for a search of the person cited. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.00 and up to one four-hour period picking up trash or refuse, or performing other court-approved community service activities. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a second offense of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $150.00 and up to one eight-hour day picking up trash or refuse, or performing other court-approved community service activities. 
(e)  Any person convicted of a third offense of violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00 and up to two eight-hour days picking up trash or refuse, or performing other court-approved community service activities. 
(f)  Any minor under the age of 17 years who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 04-012-2008, § 1(9-1-9), 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 26-4. - Waste from industrial operations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to allow any accumulation of any waste material or waste products within the city limits in the operation or maintenance of any saw mill, planer mill, feed and seed grinding and cleaning mill or plant, pecan shelling plant, iron and steel work, earth processing plant, cotton gin, flour mill, grist and corn mill, and cleaner, dryer and laundry, wherein such accumulation of any waste products or waste materials shall become a detriment to the well being, safety, health, happiness and enjoyment of private property of the citizens of the city. Each day that this section is so violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-7) 
Sec. 26-5. - Public drunkenness/drinking on public streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be on the streets of the city in an intoxicated condition. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance or engage in conduct offensive to others on the public streets or in public places while drunk or intoxicated. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating or alcoholic beverages on the public streets or on public property. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-2; Ord. No. 003-005-2013, § 3(9-1-2), 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 26-6. - Posting signs on poles without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-5) 
Sec. 26-7. - Penalties for violation. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of section 26-86 and which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-4) 
Secs. 26-8—26-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 26-33. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, to perform any of the following: 
(1)  Act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Without provocation, use to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; 
(4)  Without provocation, use to another, or of him in his presence so as to be heard by him, any abusive, offensive or insulting language in the endeavor to, or that is calculated to, annoy, insult, harass, or in a disorderly manner interfere with him while peacefully engaged in pursuit of his vocation or pleasure; 
(5)  Without provocation, use obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace; 
(6)  Interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm; 
(7)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so; 
(8)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(9)  Incite or be involved in inciting a riot; 
(10)  Gather or collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities; 
(11)  Address a threat or threats to any member of the city police department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the lawful performance of his duties, or any other person, when such threat or threats have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence; 
(12)  Damage, befoul or disturb public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
(13)  Assemble or congregate with another or others and engage in gambling; 
(14)  Make or cause to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise, disturbance or act to the annoyance of any other person nearby, or near to any public highway, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the public annoyed; 
(15)  Fail to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is imminently threatened. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-1; Ord. No. 003-005-2013, § 3(9-1-1), 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 26-34. - Weapons; discharge in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including a pistol, rifle and/or shotgun, or to shoot an air gun, including a BB gun and/or pellet gun, within the city, except by law enforcement officers in the line of duty, and the military when on drill or parade, or at a funeral in honor of the dead; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to shoot a BB gun upon private property if that person shall have first obtained the express permission of the owner of that property to do so. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-6) 
Secs. 26-35—26-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-57—26-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOISE 

Sec. 26-86. - Findings; creating unnecessary noise. 
(a)  It is found and declared that: 
(1)  The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises within the limits of the city is a condition which has existed for some time; 
(2)  The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; 
(3)  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are in pursuance of and for the purposes of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, general welfare and the peace and quiet of the city and its residents. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noises which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(c)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section; however, these acts shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signaling device of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios; stereos, etc. The use of, operation of or permitting to be used or operated any radio, television, musical instrument, stereo, digital player or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, at any time with louder volume than is necessary for the convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such radio, musical instrument, stereo, compact disc player, tape player machine or other device in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers. The use of, operation of or permitting to be used or operated any loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound for the purpose of advertising or other broadcast; provided, however, that upon application to the mayor and council, a temporary permit for such loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device may be granted. 
(4)  Animals. The keeping of any animal which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Yelling. Yelling, shouting or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(Code 2002, § 9-1-3) 
Secs. 26-87—26-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MINORS 

Sec. 26-116. - Title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "City of Wrens Juvenile Evening Curfew Ordinance." 
(Code 2002, § 3-6-1; Ord. No. 01-007-2009, § 3(3-6-1), 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 26-117. - Purpose. 
The mayor and council have determined that there has been an increase in juvenile violence and crime by persons under the age of 17 years in the city resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable behavior; that persons under the age of 17 years are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime; that there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally provided by parents for minors resulting in an increase in crime, substance abuse, school drop out rates, juvenile pregnancy, and other illicit behavior. The city has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities which are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. The mayor and council have determined that a curfew for those under the age of 17 years will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help to attain the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the city and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. The mayor and council have determined that a curfew ordinance will increase parental responsibility for minors within their control and decrease minor delinquency. 
(Code 2002, § 3-6-2; Ord. No. 01-007-2009, § 3(3-6-2), 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 26-118. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency errand means a mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that call for immediate action. The term "emergency errand" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Minor means any unemancipated person under the age of 17 years. 
Person having lawful custody or control means and includes, in addition to the parent or guardian of the person of the minor, any person who is over 21 years of age or any public or private agency or other legal entity authorized by a parent, guardian of the person of the minor, or court to have the custody or control of such child. 
Public place means any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, eating establishments, playgrounds, malls, or other places or buildings open to the public; any cemeteries, school yards, bodies of water or watercourses; any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment, or public accommodation, including parking lots; and any vacant lot or land. 
(Code 2002, § 3-6-3; Ord. No. 01-007-2009, § 3(3-6-3), 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 26-119. - Hours of curfew; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in any public place unsupervised by his parent, legal guardian, or other adult over the age of 21 years having the lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on weekdays (not to include Friday) and Sunday evening; provided, however, that on Friday and Saturday evening the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.; and provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult over the age of 21 years having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult over the age of 21 years having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(3)  When the minor is traveling to, or returning directly home from, lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(4)  When the minor is attending an official school, religious, or recreational activity or any activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion, provided such activity is supervised by adults and sponsored by an entity which takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or recreational activity or any activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion, provided such activity is supervised by adults and sponsored by an entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(5)  When the minor is engaged in interstate and intrastate vehicular travel through the city with parental or guardian consent; or 
(6)  When the minor is legally emancipated. 
(Code 2002, § 3-6-4; Ord. No. 01-007-2009, § 3(3-6-4), 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 26-120. - Parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of child to permit minor's violation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child under the age of 17 years, to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow such minor to violate the provisions of this article. A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2002, § 3-6-5; Ord. No. 01-007-2009, § 3(3-6-5), 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 26-121. - Jurisdiction. 
Any minor under the age of 17 years who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court of the county. Any parent, guardian, or other person having custody who violates this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the city municipal court. 
(Code 2002, § 3-6-7; Ord. No. 01-007-2009, § 3(3-6-7), 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 26-122. - Review after adoption. 
(a)  By December 31 of each year following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the police chief shall review this article and report and make recommendations to the city council concerning the effectiveness of and the continuing need for the article. In addition to any other information the police chief deems relevant or appropriate, the police chief's report may include the following information: 
(1)  The practicality of enforcing the article and any problems with enforcement; 
(2)  The impact of the article on crime statistics; 
(3)  The number of persons successfully prosecuted for a violation of the article; and 
(4)  The net cost of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Failure of the police chief to provide such report or any of the information in subsection (a) of this section in such report shall not affect the validity of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 3-6-8; Ord. No. 01-007-2009, § 3(3-6-8), 7-14-2009) 
Chapter 27 - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 27-1. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Wrens (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted this chapter for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
Codified Ordinances means the Code of the City. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the city administrator of the city or his or her designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 27-4. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this chapter, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the director within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-5. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-6. - Incomplete registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-7. - Acceptance of the registration. 
Acceptance of registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-8. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 

Sec. 27-9. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the director in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-10. - Permit procedure. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city administrator may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the director. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of Facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-11. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the office of the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-12. - Issuance of permit. 
If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-13. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-14. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-15. - Cancellation for cause. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a Utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-16. - Expiration of permit. 
If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 27-17. - Utility Accommodation Manual adopted. 
The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the office of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this ordinance and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Wrens municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-18. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically provided in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-19. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-20. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-21. - Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating equipment unless and until the Utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, notice beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
ARTICLE V. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 27-22. - Right-of-way facility repairs. 
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-23. - Street facility repairs. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
ARTICLE VI. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 27-24. - Site available. 
The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-25. - Stop work order. 
At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-26. - Notice. 
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the city. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
ARTICLE VII. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 27-27. - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in article III, section 27-13. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 27-28. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
ARTICLE IX. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 27-29. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-30. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the city Charter, and under the provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-31. - Compliance. 
No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-32. - Appeal of administrative decisions. 
All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 27-33. - Chapter headings. 
Chapter headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20161001 , § 3, 11-1-2016) 
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any institution, public or private corporation, individual, partnership, or other entity. 
Premises means land, buildings, or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored for collection. 
Refuse means all solid wastes of a community, including garbage, ashes, rubbish, dead animals, street cleanings, and solid market and industrial wastes, but not including body wastes. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-1) 
Sec. 28-2. - Prohibitions; private responsibility. 
(a)  The owner or his agent, or the occupant, of any premises within the city shall be responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises occupied by him, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or allow to be placed or deposited on his premises any refuse except as designated by the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person responsible for: 
(1)  Refuse on premises not served by the refuse collection system of the city; or 
(2)  Refuse not acceptable for collection by the city; 
shall make arrangements for the collection and disposal of such refuse with a refuse collector who holds a valid permit issued by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-5) 
Secs. 28-3—28-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 28-23. - Functions of the responsible authority. 
The city administrator, in order to protect the health and safety of the people of this city, is authorized and directed, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of this article, to control the storage, collection, and disposal of refuse within the city, to provide a public refuse collection and refuse disposal service from designated sites and/or premises within the city so that the type and usual quantity of refuse can be safely and expeditiously handled by such public refuse collection and disposal service, and/or to approve and regulate the establishment, maintenance, and operation of private refuse collection systems and refuse disposal methods and sites. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 28-24. - Funds; appropriation, borrowing, other means. 
(a)  The mayor and council are authorized to make funds available by appropriation, by borrowing, or by other means, in accordance with the laws and procedures of this city, for equipment for the collection or disposal of refuse, and for the establishment, maintenance and operation of refuse collection systems and refuse disposal methods and sites. 
(b)  Refuse service charges within the city, for the purpose of financing the establishment, maintenance and operation of refuse collection systems or refuse disposal methods and sites, are hereby levied in such amounts as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Refuse service charges, as provided by this section, shall be payable monthly, by separate billing in conjunction with the water bill. Such refuse service charges shall be collected by the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-3) 
Sec. 28-25. - Permits for collectors of refuse not handled by city. 
(a)  The city has elected to enter into an exclusive contract, with an independent contractor, for the collection of all residential and commercial solid waste generated within the city. The independent contractor, selected by the city through the bidding process, will be issued an exclusive permit, pursuant to the terms outlined below and the contract entered into by and between the city and the selected independent contractor, to engage in the exclusive business of refuse collection or refuse disposal for compensation in the city. The exclusive contract permit fee is set at $3,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Only in the event that the city elects not to enter into an exclusive contract for the collection and disposal of solid waste will additional permits for the collection of solid waste be issued. It shall be unlawful for any person who does not possess a permit from the city to engage in the business of refuse collection or refuse disposal for compensation in the city. If applicable, the responsible authority shall issue permits for such applicants, provided that such permits shall be limited to persons having proper equipment and personnel to collect and dispose of refuse in accordance with the provisions of section 28-34. 
(c)  Every person desiring to engage in the collection and/or disposal of refuse shall make written application to the responsible authority, setting forth the name of such person, the residence address thereof or the address of the place of business, a description of the equipment to be used in the collection and/or disposal of such refuse, the place and method of disposal to be practiced. Upon approval of this application, the responsible authority shall issue a permit to the applicant. The permit fee, as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, shall be payable in advance to the responsible authority. 
(d)  Any person whose application for a permit has been denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing before the mayor and council under the procedure provided by section 28-26. 
(e)  Any permit issued under this article, except as authorized under subsection (a) of this section, shall expire on December 31 of the year issued. Permits shall be renewable annually, in the same manner and upon payment of the same annual fee as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Permits issued pursuant to this article are nontransferable. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-4; Ord. No. 01-010-2002, § 3, 10-8-2002) 
Sec. 28-26. - Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings. 
Whenever the city administrator determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or company responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  Such notice shall: 
a.  Be put into writing; 
b.  Include a statement of reasons why it is being issued; 
c.  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; and 
d.  Be served upon the person or company. 
(2)  Such notice may: 
a.  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article; 
b.  State that, unless conditions or practices described in such notice which violate this article are corrected within the reasonable time specified in such notice, a permit which has been issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-6) 
Sec. 28-27. - Inspection. 
The city administrator or his designee, after identifying himself, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-7) 
Sec. 28-28. - Refuse acceptable for collection by the city. 
The following refuse shall be considered to be acceptable for collection by the city: 
(1)  Garbage. Rotten animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of foods. 
(2)  Ashes. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible materials. 
(3)  Rubbish. Non-rotting solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of paper, cardboard, cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, earthenware, metals and similar materials. 
(4)  Dead animals. Small, dead animals, not exceeding 75 pounds each in weight which die in the normal course of community activity but excluding condemned animals, animals from a slaughterhouse, or other animals normally considered industrial refuse, shall be removed by the city upon request. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-8) 
Sec. 28-29. - Refuse not acceptable for collection by the city. 
The following refuse is unacceptable for city collection: 
(1)  Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials, and explosives. 
(2)  Unusual quantities of materials resulting from the repair, excavation, or construction of buildings or structures, such as earth, plaster, mortar and roofing material. 
(3)  Materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance with these regulations. 
(4)  Solid wastes resulting from industrial processes. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-9) 
Sec. 28-30. - Refuse storage. 
(a)  Bulky rubbish, such as trees, weeds, and large cardboard boxes, may be bundled so as not to exceed four feet in length nor 50 pounds in weight. 
(b)  All other refuse shall be stored in containers meeting the specifications of section 28-31, provided that bulk storage containers can be used if they are of a type which can be mechanically emptied by refuse trucks. Plastic or paper refuse sacks can be used if placed inside the roll cart. 
(c)  Garbage shall be drained and wrapped. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to permit refuse, except bulky rubbish, to accumulate on any premises except in containers which are approved by the mayor and council, in accordance with the specifications contained in this section. 
(e)  Ashes containing hot embers shall not be placed in containers for collection. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove covers, overturn, or otherwise damage receptacles or create litter or health problems. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-10) 
Sec. 28-31. - Roll cart system for residences. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply only to the "roll cart system." Except as provided herein, the roll cart system shall be the only approved system for use by residential customers in the city. 
(b)  Property of city. The carts shall remain the property of the city and will be assigned to residents for the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the occupant. 
(c)  Resident's responsibility. The person having authority to control the disposal of garbage in any household shall cause all garbage collected therein to be placed in a receptacle supplied by the city and placed at the curb on scheduled collection days. 
(d)  Weight. The combined weight of a container and its contents shall not exceed 200 pounds and the container shall not be filled to overflowing. 
(e)  Identification. Where more than one family occupies a dwelling or apartment, the garbage receptacles shall be marked by the city so as to indicate the family using the particular garbage receptacle. The receptacle may be identified by putting the apartment number thereon or the name of the household. When receptacles are so identified, such receptacle may be used only by the person whose name or other identification is shown thereon. 
(f)  Lost, stolen or damaged containers. Any residential container provided by the city which becomes lost, stolen, or damaged shall be replaced by the city and cost of such replacement shall be borne by the city or property owner, depending upon the circumstances of damages or disappearance. The city shall be the sole determiner as to responsibility. Containers which are damaged through normal usage shall be repaired or replaced by the city. 
(g)  Maintenance of container. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to maintain all garbage and trash containers serving his property in a clean and sanitary manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects, and rodents, or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to the occupants of the dwelling unit or the neighborhood. Containers shall be maintained in compliance with state and county health code requirements. 
(h)  Location of container. Receptacles provided to residences by the city as provided herein shall be placed in the area between the sidewalk and curb or in an accessible place approved by the public works department. Containers shall not be placed at the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and shall be removed from the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the collection day. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the public works department for persons with physical limitations which prevent placement of the garbage receptacles at the curb, provided such person submits a written request for such exception. 
(i)  Time of collection. The public works department shall provide a schedule to each residence receiving garbage collection service from the city which shall indicate the days on which such collection will be made. 
(j)  Outside city customers. Customers living outside the city currently receiving garbage service may purchase a container and continue to receive garbage service. Garbage will not be picked up where the roll cart system is not in use. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-11) 
Sec. 28-32. - Frequency of collection. 
The mayor and council shall make known to the customers the day or days when refuse pick-up will be provided to each section of the city. Any major changes to the above schedule will be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed change or changes. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-12) 
Sec. 28-33. - Place of collection. 
All roll carts shall be placed for collection as provided in section 28-31(h). All rubbish including yard clippings shall be placed at the curb. Customers shall request pick-up of bulky items and pay an additional fee as established by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-13) 
Sec. 28-34. - Refuse disposal. 
(a)  All disposal of refuse shall be by a method or methods in accordance with requirements of state and local law, and shall include the maximum practicable rodent, insect, and nuisance control at the place or places of disposal. 
(b)  There shall be no burning at any public disposal site within the city, and any fires at these sites which have been started accidentally, intentionally or by spontaneous combustion will be extinguished immediately. 
(c)  Animal refuse and carcasses of dead animals shall be buried or cremated as directed by any authorized representative of the public works department. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-14) 
Sec. 28-35. - Equipment. 
(a)  All public or private vehicles used for the collection or disposal of refuse shall have enclosed bodies, or suitable provision for covering the body. Provision and use of a tarpaulin or canvas cover to enclose open bodies of collection vehicles may be permitted when specifically approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Vehicles used for the collection or disposal or garbage, or of refuse containing garbage, shall have watertight, metal bodies of easily cleanable construction, shall be cleaned at sufficient frequency to prevent nuisance or insect breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2-15) 
Chapter 30 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Permit to dig in streets—Generally. 
No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the city, but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 2002, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Same—Application for permit. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 30-1, shall make written application therefore, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Code 2002, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Same—City indemnified. 
Any person, firm or corporation obtaining a permit, as provided for in sections 30-1 and 30-2, agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage, for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's or corporation's operations. 
(Code 2002, § 4-1-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Street repair. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person, firm or corporation making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person, firm or corporation, neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city clerk, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 2002, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Excavations; leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a permit under the sections of this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of work. 
(Code 2002, § 4-1-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Sidewalk construction. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation, of any brick, concrete, wood or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 2002, § 4-1-6) 
Sec. 30-7. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, concrete, pavement or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be able to in any way injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 2002, § 4-1-7) 
Sec. 30-8. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in any way controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city following ten days notice by the city to perform such task. 
(Code 2002, § 8-1-5) 
Secs. 30-9—30-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET SYSTEM PLAN 

Sec. 30-35. - System shown on map. 
There is hereby established an official system of street names in the city as shown on the database and map of the county E911 system, as produced by the county E911 office, a copy of which is incorporated into and made part of this article. A copy of said map shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 6-3-1) 
Sec. 30-36. - Changes of names. 
Names of streets in the city shall remain as shown on the map unless officially changed by specific ordinance. 
(Code 2002, § 6-3-2) 
Sec. 30-37. - New streets. 
No new streets shall be accepted by the city nor shall municipal improvements be made thereon until such streets have been named; if they are extensions of existing streets, the existing names shall be continued; and if not extensions, names recorded shall not duplicate or closely approximate street names already assigned. 
(Code 2002, § 6-3-3) 
Sec. 30-38. - Uniform numbering system. 
A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings, as shown on the map identified in section 30-35, is hereby adopted for use in the city. This map and all explanatory matters thereon are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 6-3-11) 
Sec. 30-39. - Assignment of numbers. 
(a)  All properties or parcels of land within the corporate limits of the city shall hereafter be identified by reference to the uniform numbering system adopted herein. 
(b)  A separate number shall be assigned for each 20 feet of frontage in congested business areas and each 50 feet of frontage in other areas. 
(c)  Each house or building shall bear the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance of such principal building shall bear a separate number. 
(d)  Numerals indicating the official numbers for each house or building shall be posted in a manner as to be visible from the street on which the property is located. Such numerals may be obtained from the city clerk at cost or from private sources. 
(Code 2002, § 6-3-12) 
Sec. 30-40. - Administration. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be responsible for maintaining the numbering system, but the planning commission or other designated authority shall approve the system in new subdivisions. In the performance of this responsibility the commission or authority shall be guided by the provisions of section 30-39. 
(b)  The city clerk shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this article. 
(c)  The city clerk shall issue to any property owner in the city, upon request and at cost, a set of numerals for each building or separate front entrance to such building. In doing so, the clerk shall issue only numerals for the number assigned to such building under the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the clerk may issue additional numerals in accord with the official numbering system whenever a property has been subdivided, a new front entrance opened, or undue hardship has been worked on any property owner. 
(Code 2002, § 6-3-13) 
Chapter 32 - TAXATION, LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. title 48; occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; fair business practices, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-90 et seq.; adult bookstores and movie houses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue; interest. 
(a)  For the collection of delinquent taxes, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the designated city official and executed by the appropriate law enforcement officer under the procedure provided by the laws of the state governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available process and remedies. 
(b)  A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state or county taxes. 
(c)  The amount due on all delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) of this section, as well as any interest or penalty thereon, shall be listed as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(d)  Any license, privilege, certificate or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city clerk for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interests, fines or other revenue, within three calendar months and ten days after any payment is due; provided that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the mayor and council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the action or restore the privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect but only upon finding that the city clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all fi. fas. issued hereunder shall earn interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law, and in addition, a penalty may be charged. 
(Code 2002, § 2-5-13) 
Secs. 32-2—32-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 32-21. - Property tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefore shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 32-22. - Property tax due and payable. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. 
(b)  Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before December 20, but in the event of adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, the city shall, within a reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by resolution of the mayor and council, after receipt from the county of the adjustment information, refund any overpayments or bill for any underpayments. 
(Code 2002, § 2-5-12) 
Secs. 32-23—32-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES 

Sec. 32-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by the city as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax. 
Practitioner of profession and occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation, but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-1) 
Sec. 32-49. - Administrative fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $40.00 shall be required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial startup or reopening of those accounts. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-2) 
Sec. 32-50. - Purpose and scope of occupation tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-3) 
Sec. 32-51. - Occupation tax levied; occupational tax structure. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon the number of full-time employees or full-time position equivalents in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city in accordance with the schedule outlined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  An occupation tax based upon the number of full-time employees or full-time position equivalents in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state in accordance with the schedule outlined in subsection (c) of this section if the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the corporate city limits for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns real property or personal property which generates income and which is located in the corporate city limits. 
Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this section if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state. 
(c)  Employees tax liability shall be as follows: 
(1)  0—2 employees: $90.00 minimum tax. 
(2)  3—10 employees: $35.00 per employee. 
(3)  11—20 employees: $32.00 per employee. 
(4)  21—30 employees: $25.00 per employee. 
(5)  31—40 employees: $18.00 per employee. 
(6)  41—50 employees: $9.00 per employee. 
(7)  Over 50 employees: $8.00 per employee with a maximum of $1,000.00. 
For the purposes of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time employee position equivalents. 
(d)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city administrator. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-4) 
Sec. 32-52. - Restrictions on imposition of occupation tax. 
(a)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each individual location of a business or practitioner within the corporate city limits. 
(b)  A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city if the business or practitioner conducts the largest dollar volume of business or service within the corporate city limits. This restriction shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax to the other local governments. 
(c)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. No occupational tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside of the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-5) 
Sec. 32-53. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
Where a person or entity conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-6) 
Sec. 32-54. - Commencement on or after July 1. 
If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. However, the administrative fee provided in section 32-49 shall not be prorated. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-7) 
Sec. 32-55. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  Following receipt of the filing of an initial occupation tax return and administrative fee by a new applicant, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the return to the city administrator or other designated official. The city administrator or his designee shall review the return and other applicable documentation. 
(b)  If the city administrator determines that the return is in order and all requirements for the occupation tax certificate have been met, then the administrator shall grant the request and provide an occupation tax certificate to the applicant. The occupation tax certificate shall state the nature of the business authorized, the name of the business, bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk. 
(c)  If the city administrator determines that the return is not in order or any requirements for the occupation tax certificate have not been met, then the city administrator shall deny the request and immediately provide written notice of the denial and the grounds therefore to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the denial to the mayor and city council within ten days of the denial notice being received. Requests for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk. The mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 15 days of the appeal being filed. Within ten days of the hearing, the mayor and city council may order the certificate granted with or without conditions or may affirm the denial of the certificate. The decision shall be based only upon a finding by the mayor and city council that the administrator was correct or erred in the interpretation of the conditions and regulations involved. 
(d)  Following receipt of the filing of an occupation tax return by an existing business or practitioner, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the return to the city administrator or other designated official. The city administrator shall review the return and other applicable documentation. Upon a determination by the administrator that the return is in order and all requirements have been met, the administrator shall issue an occupation tax certificate to the applicant. The occupation tax certificate shall state the nature of the business authorized, the name of the business, bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk. 
(e)  No certificate shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the city. 
(f)  No certificate shall be issued to any applicant who has any outstanding indebtedness to the city, including, but not limited to, property taxes, regulatory fees, utility bills and any other taxes or assessments. 
(g)  Unless otherwise provided in the article, all certificates shall be approved or disapproved by the city administrator within ten days of filing a return with the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-8) 
Sec. 32-56. - Display of occupation tax certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer or other city official upon request. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-9) 
Sec. 32-57. - State license display. 
Each person subject to any occupation tax who is also licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-10) 
Sec. 32-58. - Issuance of replacement certificates. 
In the event that the city clerk is notified that the business or practitioner has lost its copy of the certificate, the clerk shall make a new copy, upon showing by the business or practitioner that the required fees have been paid. In addition, the business or practitioner shall be charged a replacement fee of $30.00. Replacement certificates shall be signed by the city clerk and shall indicate the time and date upon which issued. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-11) 
Sec. 32-59. - Duration of certificate. 
Any certificate referred to in this article shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-12) 
Sec. 32-60. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the occupation tax provisions of this article: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization or vendor operating under a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5); 
(3)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission and the state department of public safety; 
(4)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3; 
(5)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(6)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356, businesses/individuals selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. Independent insurance agencies or brokers with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article; 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55; 
(11)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(12)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-13) 
Sec. 32-61. - Exemptions from payment of occupation tax. 
(a)  The following classes of persons may conduct business within the corporate city limits without paying an occupation tax, provided such person receives a certificate of exemption issued by the commissioner of the department of veterans service: 
(1)  Any disabled veteran of a war or armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
(2)  Any blind person; or 
(3)  Any veteran of peacetime service in the United States armed forces who has a physical disability incurred during the period of such service. 
(b)  Any individual seeking an exemption under this section must comply with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 43-12-1 through 43-12-9. 
(c)  Individuals receiving an exemption from payment under this section are required to obtain an occupation tax certificate from the city. Said certificate shall be marked "FREE" on its face. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-14) 
Sec. 32-62. - Effect of exemptions and limitations. 
The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees otherwise allowed by law. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-15) 
Sec. 32-63. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-16) 
Sec. 32-64. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before a certificate is issued. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-17) 
Sec. 32-65. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before January 30 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this article shall file with the city clerk, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. Said return shall be filed at the time the business or practitioner remits payment to the city clerk for the occupation tax due. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners conducting businesses in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within 30 days of a request for same such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the appropriate occupation tax due. 
(c)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-18) 
Sec. 32-66. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-19) 
Sec. 32-67. - Occupation tax; date due. 
Any occupation tax due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable no later than January 30 of each year. In the event that any person commences a business, trade, practice, or calling in the city after January 30 of any year, the occupation tax shall be due and payable within 30 days of the commencement of the business, trade, practice or calling. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-20) 
Sec. 32-68. - Change of address. 
Any business or practitioner receiving an occupation tax certificate that moves from one location to another within the city shall notify the city clerk of the move and the new address in writing on a form approved by the city. This notice shall be provided no later than the day of moving. The same certificate will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning and other building regulations of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-21) 
Sec. 32-69. - Transfer of certificates. 
Certificates shall not be transferable, except as provided in this section. In the event that the owner of a business holding a currently valid occupation tax certificate should sell or transfer the business to another individual, the purchaser of the business shall obtain free of charge a new certificate in his name for the balance of the current term of the seller's occupation tax certificate, upon making application to the administrator, and the purchaser shall be punishable for violation of this article if the transfer of the certificate provided for in this section is not made within 30 days of the transferee's operation of the business. At the date of renewal of the seller's certificate, the buyer must obtain a new certificate and comply with all applicable provisions of this article in the same manner as if he had been the original owner of the business. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-22) 
Sec. 32-70. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment is due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the occupation tax due. 
(b)  In addition to the other remedies herein provided, the city municipal court may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax due under this article. Such a civil fine shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-23) 
Sec. 32-71. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax levied, the city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes that are delinquent and remaining unpaid. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21 or, if such statute should be repealed, 1½ percent per month. The lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax. The lien shall become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax becomes delinquent tax. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of defendant located in the jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalties, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances, Code and Charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-24) 
Sec. 32-72. - Liability for officers and agents. 
All businesses or practitioners subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall be required to file a return and pay such tax. For failure to do so any officers, agents, and/or managers soliciting or obtaining such practitioner business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to file a return or pay the applicable occupation tax. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-25) 
Sec. 32-73. - Revocation/suspension of certificate. 
The mayor and council, after affording the business or practitioner a five-day notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this article to have been violated by the certificate holder, its agents, or employees in the operation of the business, revoke any and all certificates in their entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the business on probation or place other conditions thereon as the mayor and city council may deem necessary after a hearing thereon. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-26) 
Sec. 32-74. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, practitioner, or business. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-27) 
Sec. 32-75. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Any and all parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed that provide for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that impose fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, provided for in such ordinance, or for failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-28) 
Sec. 32-76. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city administrator and city police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city administrator, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants to inspect all certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-29) 
Sec. 32-77. - Requirement of public hearing. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting, amending, or repealing any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-31) 
Sec. 32-78. - Option to establish exemption, reduction, or credit. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Code 2002, § 7-1-32) 
Secs. 32-79—32-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROOMS, LODGING OR ACCOMMODATIONS EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 32-100. - Excise tax levied. 
Pursuant to the provisions of and act of the general assembly authorizing each municipality in the state to impose, levy and collect an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the municipality for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value, provided no such tax shall be levied upon the sale or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for periods of more than 30 consecutive days, or for the use of meeting rooms, there is hereby levied an excise tax in the amount of five percent of the charges to the public for such furnishing of any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodation within the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-001-2009, § 1, 1-13-2009) 
Sec. 32-101. - Tax returns required. 
Each person, firm, or corporation collecting said tax shall on or before the first day of the month following the month in which this tax shall become effective and on or before the first day of each month thereafter transmit to the city clerk or a designated representative, upon forms as prescribed by the city, returns showing the total charges for the furnishing of such rooms, lodging or accommodations as provided for herein during the preceding calendar month and shall account for and remit the tax levied herein. 
(Ord. No. 01-001-2009, § 2, 1-13-2009) 
Sec. 32-102. - Tax deduction for return preparation. 
Each person, firm or corporation collecting said tax as provided for herein shall be allowed three percent of the tax due and accounted for and remitted to the city in the form of a deduction in submitting the monthly return and paying the amount due provided said amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 01-001-2009, § 3, 1-13-2009) 
Sec. 32-103. - Failure to pay tax; penalties; interest. 
(a)  When any person, firm or corporation liable hereunder shall fail to make any return or pay the full amount of the tax required herein, there shall be imposed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues, not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater; provided, however, if such failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city administrator in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance within ten days of due date, such returns may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent return or the failure to file a return, where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due herein, a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(b)  When any person, firm or corporation fails to remit the tax, or any portion thereof, on or before the day when such tax shall be required by law to be paid, there shall be added to the amount due interest at the rate provided for executions from the date due until the date paid. 
(c)  All penalties and interest imposed herein shall be payable and collectible by the city in the manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed. 
(Ord. No. 01-001-2009, § 4, 1-13-2009) 
Sec. 32-104. - Budgeting and application of excise tax. 
The revenues raised pursuant to said excise tax shall be budgeted and applied for the promotion of the city and the county in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3)(A). 
(Ord. No. 01-001-2009, § 5, 1-13-2009) 
Sec. 32-105. - Survival of existing ordinances. 
The ordinance from which this article is derived does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance passed prior to this article where excise taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Any and all parts of prior ordinances passed that provided for the issuing and enforcing of any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that impose fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such taxes, provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or for failure to comply with any other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such excise tax or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 01-001-2009, § 6, 1-13-2009) 
Secs. 32-106—32-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REGULATORY FEES 

Sec. 32-124. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Regulatory fee means payments, whether designated as license fees, registration fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-1) 
Sec. 32-125. - Regulatory fee due; display of certificate. 
(a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupation businesses set forth in subsection (d) of this section must pay nonrefundable fee in accordance with the rate and schedule set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Other businesses and individuals not specified in subsection (d) of this section may be required to pay a regulatory fee if the city customarily performs investigation or inspection of such businesses or practitioners as protection of the public health, safety, or welfare or in the course of enforcing a state or local building, health, or safety code. Said regulatory fees for businesses and professions not listed in subsection (d) of this section shall reflect the reasonable costs of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. 
(c)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or city official upon request. 
(d)  Fee schedule. 

 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-2, tit. 7, ch. 2, app. A) 
Sec. 32-126. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-3) 
Sec. 32-127. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before a certificate is issued. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-4) 
Sec. 32-128. - Regulatory fee; date due. 
(a)  Regulatory fees charged pursuant to this article shall be paid before commencing business or the practice of a profession as a condition precedent for transacting business, or practicing a profession. 
(b)  Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health or safety of one or more individuals; 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the city within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-5) 
Sec. 32-129. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any business or person subject to any regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment is due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the regulatory fee due. 
(b)  Individuals and businesses who fail or refuse to pay any regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction before the municipal judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-6) 
Sec. 32-130. - Lien taken for delinquent regulatory fee. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the regulatory fee charged, the city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, business and practitioners for fees which are delinquent and remaining unpaid. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21 or, if such statute should be repealed, 1½ percent per month. The lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent regulatory fee. The lien shall become fixed as of the date and time the regulatory fee becomes delinquent tax. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of defendant located in the jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalties, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the regulatory fee, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the fee in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the fee, the person may collect any fees and charged due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-7) 
Sec. 32-131. - Liability for officers and agents. 
All businesses or persons subject to the regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to pay such fee. For failure to do so, any officers, agents and/or managers soliciting for or obtaining such individual business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to file a return or pay the applicable regulatory fee. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-8) 
Sec. 32-132. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess and collect any of the fees or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts of fees due. The payment of any regulatory fee provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional fees upon the same person, property, practitioner, or business. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-9) 
Sec. 32-133. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
The ordinance from which this article is derived does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where fees charged under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Any and all parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed that provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any fee or assessment required by such ordinances, or that impose fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such fees, provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or for failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-10) 
Sec. 32-134. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city administrator and city police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to regulatory fees are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city administrator, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants to inspect all certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 2002, § 7-2-11) 
Secs. 32-135—32-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 32-152. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments as defined herein, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse affect on property values and on the public health, safety, and welfare of the city, and on its citizens and property, and on the character and preservation of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a defacto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(b)  Findings. Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta, Georgia; Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Floyd County, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Renton, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Augusta, Georgia; LaGrange, Georgia; Dalton, Georgia; Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; Rome, Georgia; Bartow County, Georgia; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences are believed to be relevant to the problems faced by the city, the mayor and council take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the mayor and council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed within the city limits and prohibiting the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in said establishments is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, this article is adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-1) 
Sec. 32-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means and includes, but is not limited to: 
Adult bookstore means a business or establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means: 
a.  Any business or establishment which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business or establishment; 
b.  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
c.  Any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business or establishment that features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means a business or establishment that is used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein, including a business or establishment wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult video store means a business or establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in movies or other reproductions, for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of reproduced materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Bath house or massage parlor means a business or establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means a business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic entertainment/dance establishment means a business or establishment, including, but not limited to, a nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Lingerie modeling studio means a business or establishment whose primary business activity consists of live performers exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Building inspector/code enforcement officer means the city employee, as designated by the mayor and council of the city, responsible for enforcement and licensing of businesses/construction within the city. 
Church means a place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship; a body of communicates gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies; congregation, or organization assembled for religious purposes. 
Conviction means an adjudication of guilt, pleas of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Distance and measurement mean the measurement of lineal feet from the nearest point of the property line of the proposed premises of an adult entertainment establishment to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital. A radius shall be measured from the property line of the proposed premises to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. 
Employee means any person engaged to provide or in fact providing services for an adult entertainment establishment to patrons on a regular basis whether for legal considerations or otherwise. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors whose main purpose is to provide entertainment or other services to patrons, including, but not limited to, dancers and waitresses, employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered as employees. 
Good moral character means having no convictions of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within the previous five years. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendre or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described by location, and boundaries, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by county, city, state or federal government or any governmental entity or agency in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse or roominghouse, duplex, or other multi-family housing, used as a dwelling for humans, or any properties owned therefore. 
School means a state, county, city, church school, or other schools, public or private, that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post high school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers for persons of any age. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: sodomy, cunnilingus, fellatio, pedophilia, lesbianism, homosexuality; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron; 
(5)  Sexually oriented torture; or 
(6)  Fondling or other sexual contact with an animal so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-2) 
Sec. 32-154. - Regulations. 
The following regulations apply to all adult entertainment establishments as described herein and located within the city: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to employ, admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located in any zoning district, other than Commercial District (Adult Oriented) A-1A on at least one acre and within the following distances as defined and measured as stated herein: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of a parcel of land upon which any single-family or multifamily residence or within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for single-family or multifamily uses or purposes; 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, licensed day care center, governmentally-owned or operated building, library, civic center, public park, playground, hospital, nursing home or community club; 
c.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located; 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with any person to provide services or perform in said establishment who is a person not permitted for employment pursuant to this article. 
(5)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, dates of birth, photograph, and social security numbers of all employees. 
(6)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, on Sunday, and on Christmas Day. 
(7)  No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any adult entertainment establishment so as to prevent a clear view throughout the premises, except for separate office, kitchens, restores, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(8)  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment shall have any interior connection or doors with any other place of business. 
(9)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated such that the activity on the interior of the premises is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall permit the use of alcoholic beverages of any kind to be sold, possessed or consumed in or on the premises. 
(11)  No licensee shall permit the use of illegal drugs or controlled substances of any kind to be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted in or on the premises. 
(12)  No licensee shall permit an employee to expose for public view his specified anatomical areas in a lewd or obscene fashion. 
(13)  Every act or omission of an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee or as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. 
(14)  No licensee shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area, breasts, or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. All public signs or other forms of advertisement shall comply with this requirement. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-3) 
Sec. 32-155. - Additional regulations; adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments, and lingerie modeling studios. 
The following additional regulations apply to adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments, and lingerie modeling studios (herein "adult dance establishments") as described herein: 
(1)  All live dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(2)  All live dancing or entertainment shall occur no closer than ten feet from any patron. 
(3)  No dancer, entertainer or employee shall fondle or caress any patron nor allow any patron to fondle or caress any dancer, entertainer or employee so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
(4)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(5)  No dancer or entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity directly from any patron nor allow any patron to directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(6)  All areas of the licensed premises shall be fully lighted at all times when open for business, which shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 candles per square foot. 
(7)  No licensee shall permit any employee to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this article. 
(8)  No licensee shall permit an employee to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(9)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation. 
(10)  No licensee shall permit a male employee to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(11)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in, or simulate bestiality. 
(12)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated sexual activity with another person. 
(13)  No licensee shall permit an employee to sit upon or straddle the leg, legs or body of a patron therein. 
(14)  No licensee shall permit or allow a patron to participate in any act or activity upon the licensed premises which an employee is prohibited from performing. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-4) 
Sec. 32-156. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city limits, any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article, without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-5) 
Sec. 32-157. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-6) 
Sec. 32-158. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person or legal entity desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to or with the building inspector/code enforcement officer of the city or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee of $250.00 shall be paid to the building inspector/code enforcement officer to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. 
(b)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this article and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. 
(d)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and/or revoked under the provisions of the Code of the City of Wrens, Georgia." 
(e)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(f)  Where the applicant: 
(1)  Is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either: 
a.  The majority shareholder thereof; or 
b.  A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the corporation. 
(2)  Is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either: 
a.  The managing general partner thereof; or 
b.  A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the partnership. 
(3)  Is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full-time in a managing capacity on the premises, and if not, then to the sole proprietor or a person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the sole proprietor. 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "managing capacity" means the president or chief executive officer or managing or general partner of a corporation or partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-7) 
Sec. 32-159. - Application contents; supporting documents. 
(a)  Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by the building inspector/code enforcement officer. Such application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant and the nature and character of the business to be carried on. 
(2)  The previous addresses, if any, of the applicant for the period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence for each. 
(3)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair. 
(4)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within six months prior to the application. 
(5)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names, addresses, and dates of birth of each of its current officers and directors as well as all stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, whether general or limited, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses, and dates of birth of the partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(7)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(8)  The name of the owner of the premises and, if leased, a copy of the lease agreement. 
(9)  A plat, filed in triplicate, by a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing all structures and the location of the proposed premises which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 32-154(3). 
(10)  The name, address, and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the entity which is applying for the license. 
(11)  Any other information reasonably required by the building inspector/code enforcement officer in order to verify the information furnished by the applicant to obtain the license. Should the requirements of this article dictate that more than one individual and/or entity apply for and a license issue to such applicants, then all such applicants shall, on such application, designate the name, address and telephone number of an individual resident of the city to act as agent for all applicant licensees for the purpose of receiving communications and notices under this article. Proof of delivery to said agent shall be conclusive proof of receipt by a licensee of such notice, process or information. 
(b)  Each application must be complete in its entirely before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(c)  All applicants for licenses as to any premises which is to be subsequently renovated or improved shall furnish in triplicate plans and renderings of the premises as it is to exist at the time of opening. Any premises to be constructed or renovated prior to opening shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The premises shall comply with all building, health and similar city codes. 
(d)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(4)  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-8) 
Sec. 32-160. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses thereunder shall give notice that an application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for four consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the mayor and council in the newspaper in which city legal advertisements are published. The first advertisement shall not appear more than 40 days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be of the type not smaller than ten point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch column. The advertisement shall appear on the same days as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(b)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicants, the date, time and place of hearing, and a statement that any legal objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the building inspector/code enforcement officer on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(c)  Applicants shall provide proof of such notice by providing the building inspector/code enforcement officer, prior to the time of the hearing on license issuance, the affidavit of the publisher of the newspaper in which said notice was published, which affidavit shall reflect the content of the notice and the dates of publishing. 
(d)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following: 
City of Wrens Adult Entertainment License Applied For. 
A hearing before the mayor and council of Wrens shall be held on the ___ day of ________, 20___, at ___:___ o'clock (a.m./p.m.) in the in the City Council Meeting Room at Wrens City Hall, 401 Broad Street, Wrens, Georgia. All interested persons take notice. 
The sign or signs shall be a least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalk, or other public property which adjoin or adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of consideration by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-9) 
Sec. 32-161. - Application; investigation; issuance. 
The building inspector/code enforcement officer shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed 45 days, to investigate the application and the background of the applicant following the acceptance and filing of the completed application. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may, upon two readings, grant the license if the mayor and council find: 
(1)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(3)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
(4)  The applicant, if an individual; or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving sexual assault, sexual battery, prostitution, rape, sexual offenses against children, unnatural sex acts, public indecency, or any other sex act, whether attempted or consummated, prohibited by law for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partner, if the applicant is a partnership, has not, during the past ten years, had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked in this county or any other local governmental jurisdiction located within this state prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable distance provisions of this article and the city's unified development ordinance, and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(8)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(9)  Notwithstanding the above, no license shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application the same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
(10)  An annual license fee, established by resolution of the city and prorated on a calendar month basis, is paid to the building inspector/code enforcement officer. Said annual license fee is hereby resolved to be $2,000.00. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-10) 
Sec. 32-162. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment license shall be established by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. Said renewal fee is hereby resolved to be $2,000.00. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-11) 
Sec. 32-163. - License nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without affecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the licensee shall immediately notify the building inspector/code enforcement officer. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-12) 
Sec. 32-164. - Change of location. 
No licensee shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-13) 
Sec. 32-165. - Change of name. 
No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-14) 
Sec. 32-166. - Modification of licensed premises. 
After issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building within the premises, customer entry locations, or other changes shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance or other requirement of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-15) 
Sec. 32-167. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at the location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state, the city or the county. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desire of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is essentially unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-16) 
Sec. 32-168. - License, refusal. 
If the building inspector/code enforcement officer, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, he shall notify the applicant of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Any such decision shall be final unless an appeal is filed with and to the mayor and council by any aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of the decision of the building inspector/code enforcement officer. A hearing by the mayor and council of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-17) 
Sec. 32-169. - Suspension; revocation; appeal; violations/penalties; service of notice. 
(a)  Suspension. The building inspector/code enforcement officer shall suspend a license for a period of 180 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee has violated any sections of this article. If the building inspector/code enforcement officer deems a license suspension appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such suspension shall take effect ten days following the building inspector/code enforcement officer's notification unless an appeal is filed with and to the mayor and council by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the building inspector/code enforcement officer. A hearing by the mayor and council of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting. 
(b)  Revocation. 
(1)  The building inspector/code enforcement officer shall revoke a license if a cause for suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the past 12 months. 
(2)  The building inspector/code enforcement officer shall also revoke a license if he determines that: 
a.  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the materials submitted during the application process. 
b.  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
c.  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act prohibited by this article to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
d.  The owner or operator of the licensed establishment knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter the establishment. 
(3)  If the building inspector/code enforcement officer deems a license revocation appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such revocation shall take effect ten days following the building inspector/code enforcement officer's serving of his written decision upon the licensee unless an appeal is filed with and to the mayor and council by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the building inspector/code enforcement officer. A hearing by the mayor and council on the decision shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. Revocation shall continue for 12 consecutive months from the date the revocation becomes effective. 
(c)  Appeal procedure. An applicant or licensee who has timely filed an appeal with the mayor and council of the city as allowed by this article shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and council. At the time set for the hearing, the mayor and council shall receive all relevant testimony in evidence from city personnel or interested parties, and from the licensee or employee. In all hearings pursuant to this article, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The city clerk shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the charged party. He shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the charged party. 
(2)  The mayor and council shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specification as filed against the charged party and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The city representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; the charged party shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The charged party and city may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross examine witnesses. Additionally, the mayor and council may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(d)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Should any license be revoked or suspended, all signs indicating that such business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(2)  The violation of provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(e)  Service of notice. 
(1)  Any notice required to be given under this article to any applicant, licensee or employee may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for license/permit, or such updated address which may have subsequently been provided in writing to the building inspector/code enforcement officer. Notices mailed as described above shall be deemed received on the third day subsequent to their deposit in the United States mail. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of each applicant, licensee and employee to furnish notice to the building inspector/code enforcement officer in writing of any change of mailing address. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-18) 
Sec. 32-170. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. 
(1)  Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No person who has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving sexual assault, sexual battery, prostitution, rape, sexual offenses against children, unnatural sex acts, public indecency, or any other sex act, whether attempted or consummated, prohibited by law for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later offense occurring within any 24-month period; 
shall be employed by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  No person who is convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the above-noted crimes while employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall thereafter work on any premises requiring a license under this article for the applicable time described above. 
(3)  Application for permit shall be written and on forms supplied by the office of the building inspector/code enforcement officer. Such application shall state the name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant, the name and address of the employer, the name and address of the place of employment and any other information reasonably required by the building inspector/code enforcement officer in verifying the right of the applicant to obtain a permit, including a set of fingerprints on regular sheriff's department or United States Department of Justice forms. 
(b)  Approval for employment. 
(1)  A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment shall be required for all employees thereof. 
(2)  No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee to and obtains a work permit from the building inspector/code enforcement officer. The building inspector/code enforcement officer shall immediately issue said permit upon the filing of an application and payment of the fee, which permit shall be conditional and subject to revocation upon the determination by the building inspector/code enforcement officer following investigation of the applicant that the applicant is not qualified to be an employee under this article. Upon such determination the building inspector/code enforcement officer shall notify the applicant of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Any such decision shall be final and revocation shall become effective unless an appeal is filed with and to the mayor and council by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the building inspector/code enforcement officer. A hearing by the mayor and council of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. 
(3)  Any permit for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked. A nonrefundable annual fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the building inspector/code enforcement officer to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment to file with the building inspector/code enforcement officer the names of all employees with their home addresses, home telephone numbers, dates of birth, social security numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the building inspector/code enforcement officer within three days from the date of any change. 
(5)  For the purpose of this section, independent contractors shall be deemed employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(6)  Employees holding permits issued pursuant to this article shall at all times during their working hours have said permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(Code 2002, § 7-8-19) 
Secs. 32-171—32-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ARCADE REGULATION 

Sec. 32-194. - Title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "City of Wrens Arcade Ordinance." 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-1) 
Sec. 32-195. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arcade means any business where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines requiring some skill are available for use by patrons of the business and includes the main structure and the surrounding property directly incorporated into such use. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine shall have the same meaning as given in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2) and any applicable state regulations as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Building inspector/code enforcement officer means the building inspector of the city, or such other city official as the governing authority may designate from time to time to carry out the functions of the building inspector as specified in this article. 
Church building means the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship and the surrounding property or campus directly incorporated into such use in compliance with the zoning ordinances of the city. 
City park or playground means a park, recreation center, ball field, or playground owned by the city and operated by the city for use by the citizens of the city. 
Games of chance means any contrivance which for consideration affords the player an opportunity to obtain money or other things of value, the award of which is determined by chance even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid by contrivance. 
Governing authority means the mayor and city councilmembers of the city. 
Gross retail receipts means the total revenue derived by the business at any one business location from the sale of goods or services and the commission earned at any one business location on the sale of goods or services but does not include revenue from the sale of goods or services for which the business will receive only a commission. Revenue from the sale of goods or services at wholesale is not included. 
License means an operator's license issued by the city. 
Licensee means the person to whom a license is issued. 
Location means a business in the city, which has been issued a valid business occupation tax certificate. 
Main entrance door means the principal entrance by which access may be obtained to the operational area of the structure. In the case of a city park or playground or other similar facility which does not have a principal entrance to a structure, the term "main entrance door" shall mean the main entrance gate to the facility. 
Master license means the certificate issued by the state revenue commissioner which every owner of a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine must purchase and display in the owner's or operator's place of business where the machine is located for commercial use by the public for play in order to legally operate the machine in the state. 
Negotiable instrument means money or other thing which may be exchanged for money or value other than a gift certificate which can be exchanged for merchandise only in the same arcade where the gift certificate was won. 
Operator's license means a license to operate a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine requiring some skill and/or to operate an arcade. 
Person means any individual, any corporate entity or form authorized by law, including any of its subsidiaries or affiliates, or any officer, director, board member, or employee of any corporate entity or form authorized by law. 
Premises means one physically identifiable place of business of one or more contiguous rooms operating under the same trade name where bona fide coin-operated amusement machines requiring some skill are available for use by patrons of the business. The term "premises" includes areas located within the property lines of the land in which the arcade business is located. 
School building means only the state, county, or church school buildings and buildings at other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state and the surrounding property or campus which is directly incorporated into such uses, provided that schools other than state or county schools must be in compliance with the zoning ordinances of the city. 
Some skill shall have the same meaning as given in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and any applicable state regulations as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-3) 
Sec. 32-196. - Operating an arcade or similar establishment providing patrons access to games of chance; license a privilege. 
(a)  Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines requiring "some skill" may be operated in the incorporated area of the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions hereafter provided. 
(b)  All licenses issued under the terms of this article shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business of operating an arcade during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the terms of the license and the laws of the city and the state. 
(c)  All licenses issued hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This License is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted by the City of Wrens." 
(d)  The annual fee for said arcade license is $300.00. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-2) 
Sec. 32-197. - License required. 
Any person desiring to operate an arcade located in the incorporated area of the city shall, before doing so, have in the person's possession a current operator's license. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-4) 
Sec. 32-198. - Qualifications for license. 
In order to obtain a license, the applicant must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Any applicant for a license must be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  A license will be issued only to a person who is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States. Where an applicant is other than a natural person it must be an entity organized and existing under the laws of the United States or one of its states, and the natural persons who are required to join in the application must meet the qualifications of the preceding sentence. 
(3)  For a license to be issued to a general partnership, the application must be made jointly by the partnership, any managing partner, and all other partners owning at least 20 percent interest in the assets or revenues of the partnership. If there are no managing partners and there is no partner meeting the ownership requirements, then the application must be made jointly in the name of the partnership and the general partner or partners owning the greatest percentage interest in the assets and revenues of the partnership. At least one of the applicants shall be a natural person. If none of the applicants required above is a natural person, then the natural person having primary responsibility for the operation of the partnership for which the license is sought shall join in the application. 
(4)  Where the applicant for a license is a limited partnership, or a limited liability partnership, the application shall be made jointly by the limited partnership, or limited liability partnership, its general partner or partners, and any other partner owning at least a 20 percent interest in the assets or revenues of the limited partnership or limited liability partnership. At least one of the applicants must be a natural person. If none of the applicants required above is a natural person then the natural person having primary responsibility for the operation of the entity for which the license is sought shall join in the application. 
(5)  Where the applicant for a license is a corporation, the application shall be made jointly in the name of the corporation and its president or vice-president and any stockholder owning at least 20 percent of the total outstanding capital stock of the corporation. 
(6)  Where the applicant for a license is a limited liability company, the application shall be made jointly in the name of the limited liability company and its managers, and any member owning at least a 20 percent interest in the assets or revenues of the limited liability corporation. 
(7)  Where the applicant for a license is an entity other than a natural person, a partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability partnership, a corporation, or a limited liability company, the application shall be made jointly in the name of the entity, the natural person having chief executive officer authority over the business activities of the entity and any other person having at least a five percent interest in the assets or revenues of the entity. 
(8)  Licenses issued to corporations, limited liability companies, general partnerships, limited partnerships, limited liability partnership or other types of entities must be issued jointly to the entity and all of the other persons required by this article to join in the application. 
(9)  No person shall be granted a license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the governing authority that such person shall be of good moral character or in the case of an entity which is not a natural person, that such entity has a good reputation, and in no event shall a license be granted to any person who has been convicted or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any charge involving a crime of moral turpitude or illegal gambling within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. In the case of partnerships, corporations, limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited liability companies or other business entities, a license shall not be issued to the partnership, corporation, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or other entity if any partner, officer, director, shareholder, member or other person required to be listed on the application cannot meet the requirements as set forth in the preceding sentence. At the time an application is submitted for a license, the applicant shall by a duly sworn affidavit: 
a.  Certify that all of the requirements of this section have been met by the applicant and the other persons required to be listed on the application as specified above; and 
b.  Consent to a criminal background check and release the city, its mayor and councilmembers, elected officials, officers, agents, employees and representatives from any liability resulting from any criminal background check performed on the applicant. 
Should any person in whose name a license is issued after the license has been issued be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a charge involving a crime of moral turpitude or illegal gambling the license shall be immediately revoked and canceled. 
(10)  No license shall be issued to any person convicted or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to any charge under any federal, state or local law constituting a felony within ten years prior to the date of the filing of the application for the license. 
(11)  No license shall be issued to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(12)  The governing authority may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in or control over the land or building in which the arcade to be operated pursuant to the license will be located does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the licensee. 
(13)  If a person in whose name a license is issued is not a resident of the county, such person must appoint and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law, or under this article, may be served. This registered agent must be a resident of the county. If the licensee is not a natural person, it will be required to appoint and maintain a registered agent in the county if it does not have in the county any agent upon whom process can legally be served on such entity under the laws of the state. The licensee shall file the name of such registered agent along with the written consent to serve as such agent in the office of the city clerk. 
(14)  An application for a license may be denied where it appears to the governing authority that the applicant does not have adequate financial strength or adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended or likely to be a surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license. 
(15)  No license shall be issued for any arcade where more than six bona fide coin-operated amusement machines requiring some skill, which provide for noncash redemption as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1), are located if said arcade sells alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-5) 
Sec. 32-199. - Application for license. 
(a)  A person desiring to obtain a license shall make application to the city council on the forms prescribed by the governing authority. 
(b)  The application for a license shall require, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of each applicant as required by section 32-198. 
(2)  The name and location of the proposed arcade and the name and address of the owner of the premises in which the arcade is to be carried on. 
(3)  A description of all of the bona fide coin-operated amusement machines requiring some skill to be operated in the proposed arcade, including the name, address and telephone number of the owner of each machine and the control number for each machine from the state department of revenue permit sticker affixed thereto or displayed at the location where the machine is located. 
(4)  A financial statement current within three months of the application evidencing the financial responsibility of the applicant or applicants. 
(5)  Certification from the city that all taxes then due to the city by the applicant have been paid and that all taxes on the arcade location have been paid. 
(6)  All applicants shall furnish fingerprints, a copy of the current occupation tax certificate from the city for the arcade, and other material as required by the governing authority. Failure to furnish data, as required by the governing authority, shall be deemed to be a withdrawal of the application. 
(7)  Each application for an initial license as opposed to a renewal shall have attached a plat of the land on which the arcade and/or bona fide coin-operated amusement machine is proposed to be located showing the location of the improvements thereon. Such plat must be prepared by a land surveyor registered under the laws of the state and the surveyor shall show on the plat and certify as to the accuracy thereof. 
(8)  A copy of the master license issued by the state department of revenue to the owner of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine located in the city. 
(9)  The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable, investigatory and administrative fee of $125.00. 
(c)  Failure to furnish all information as required by an application form will cause the application to be deemed to be incomplete and no action will be taken thereon until it is complete. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-6) 
Sec. 32-200. - Application approval procedures. 
(a)  An application shall be presented to the governing authority within 45 days after the date it is deemed complete. The city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the date on which the application will be presented to the governing authority, which notice shall be given in sufficient time to entitle the applicant to meet the public notice requirements of section 32-201. 
(b)  At the time the application is presented to the governing authority, the applicant may appear and present any matters in support of the application and any other person may appear and present matters in opposition to the application. 
(c)  Upon the completion of the presentation, the governing authority shall take action denying or granting the application or deferring action for a period not to exceed 45 days in order to obtain further information. If the application is denied, the governing authority shall set forth the reasons for the denial. 
(d)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this article, the applicant may not reapply for a similar license for the same location for at least one year from the date of such denial. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-7) 
Sec. 32-201. - Public notice. 
A person filing an application for a new license as opposed to an application for the renewal of an existing license shall give public notice of the filing of the application as follows: 
(1)  By publishing three times in the 30 days preceding the consideration of the application by the city in the newspaper in which sheriff's sales in the county are placed a notice of the application in a form approved by the city; and 
(2)  By posting a sign for at least 30 days, preceding the consideration of the application by the city, in a prominent position on the property where it can be readily read from the road stating such application is being applied for. The applicant must provide the city proof of the giving of this public notice prior to the city's consideration of the application. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-8) 
Sec. 32-202. - Providing verified monthly report. 
Each licensee, for the duration of the license term, to include renewals thereof, shall provide to the city a copy of each monthly verified report setting out separately the gross retail receipts from the bona fide coin-operated amusement machines and the gross retail receipts from the business location in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-9) 
Sec. 32-203. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No arcade operated pursuant to a license shall be located in a building which is closer than 100 yards to a church building or a city park or playground, or closer than 200 yards to a school building or an arcade. In applying this section, the city shall determine what property is included in a school building, church building, city park or playground or arcade consistent with the definitions set forth in section 32-195, and the determination of the city shall be final. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured in a straight line from the main entrance door of the establishment for which the license is being sought to the nearest point of the boundary line of the land constituting the campus of the church building, school building, city park or playground or arcade. 
(c)  No arcade which is operated pursuant to a license from the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be denied continued operation under such existing license, nor denied any renewal of such license, nor shall any new operator of such arcade be denied a new license based upon the measurement set forth in this section. Upon cessation of the operation of the arcade pursuant to such license, such exemption shall cease. 
(d)  As to any license issued in the future, if the distance requirements herein are met at the time of issuance of the license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church building, school building or city park or playground within the distance prohibited herein shall not prevent the continued operation of the arcade pursuant to the license or the renewal of the license or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent operator of such arcade so long as the business operation of the arcade or establishment does not cease. 
(e)  The holder of title to any property making up a church building, school building or county park or playground may waive the distance requirements of this section as they apply to such facility in any specific instance by recording in the real estate records in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county, a written instrument evidencing such waiver and setting out the terms thereof, which instrument shall be executed and witnessed with the same formalities as a deed filed for record in such clerk's office. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-10) 
Sec. 32-204. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Any license granted under this article shall be subject to revocation or suspension for cause. Whenever, in the opinion of the building inspector, there is cause to revoke or suspend a license, written notice of intention to revoke or suspend shall be furnished the holder thereof not less than ten days before the meeting of the governing authority at which time the holder of the license may make such showing as he may deem proper. After a hearing, the governing authority may revoke or suspend the license if, in its discretion, there has been any violation of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the United States or the State of Georgia in the conduct of the arcade or the operation of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines requiring some skill by any members of the public. 
(b)  Cause for revocation or suspension shall include, but not be limited to, the following actions by license holder: 
(1)  Conviction or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a change involving a crime of moral turpitude or illegal gambling in any jurisdiction to which the applicant was subject, including any violation of the non cash redemption laws as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and any applicable state regulations as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  If holding a license, conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge involving a crime of moral turpitude or illegal gambling, including a charge of violation of the non-cash redemption laws as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and any applicable state regulations as the same may be amended from time to time by an employee of the arcade operated pursuant to such license, in the course of business. 
(3)  Providing winnings, through tokens, vouchers, points, tickets, non-cash merchandise, prizes, toys, gift certificates or novelties, for the successful play for a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine requiring some skill which can be redeemed outside of the arcade from which issued. 
(4)  Providing false or forged information to the governing authority in obtaining a license under this article. 
(5)  Impersonating a license holder. 
(6)  Using or attempting to use a license that has expired or been revoked. 
(7)  Deriving more than 50 percent of the business owner's or business operator's monthly gross retail receipts, for the location where the license is granted, from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines requiring some skill which provide for noncash redemption as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d). Licensee's monthly gross retail receipts shall be computed excluding any income derived from the sale of the Georgia Lottery Corporation's lottery tickets for purposes of making this determination. 
(8)  Violation of the distance requirements set forth in this article. 
(9)  Violating any provision of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-11) 
Sec. 32-205. - Automatic license forfeiture for non-use. 
Any licensee holding a license who shall, for a period of three consecutive months, cease to operate the arcade or bona fide coin-operated amusement machine requiring some skill as authorized in the operator's license shall automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. If the arcade operation is interrupted as a result of damage to the premises where the arcade is located which makes it impractical to operate the arcade and if repairs of such damage are commenced within said three months and diligently pursued to completion or as a result of the premises being remodeled, then this section shall not apply to such cessation of operation. If a license is issued for the operation of an arcade in a building which has not yet been completed, the license will not be forfeited unless the license fails to begin operations of the arcade within a period of 180 days from the date of issuance of the license. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-12) 
Sec. 32-206. - Expiration/renewal. 
(a)  Each license granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which the license was issued. A licensee who desires to renew a license shall file an application, with the city clerk, on the form provided for renewal of the license. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before October 31 of the year in which the license being renewed expires. If a license renewal application is received after the December 31 expiration date, such application shall be treated as an application for a new license and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules, regulations, and fees for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been issued. 
(b)  Any person applying for renewal of a license must pay the license fees, administrative fees and investigative fees at the time of filing the application. Failure to pay such fees at that time shall result in the application for renewal being treated as not filed or withdrawn. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-13) 
Sec. 32-207. - Separate application and separate operator's license for each location of an arcade or bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. 
Each operator's license shall be limited to the operation of an arcade or a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine requiring some skill at a specific location as described in the license. A separate application must be made and separate operator's licenses must be obtained for each location at which an arcade or a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine requiring some skill is operated. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-14) 
Sec. 32-208. - Display at place of business. 
The license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to public view at the premises for which the license was granted. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-15) 
Sec. 32-209. - Transferability. 
No license shall be transferable. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-16) 
Sec. 32-210. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any violation of this article or any failure to comply with its requirements shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any and all licenses held by the licensee regardless of the number of licenses or locations involved and regardless of whether or not the licensee knew of or contributed to such violation. It is the intent of this section without limiting the generality of the foregoing to grant to the governing authority the right to suspend or revoke any and all licenses held by a licensee when any violation of this article occurs at any place of business operated by the licensee pursuant to a license. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-17) 
Sec. 32-211. - Receipt of money or other negotiable instruments. 
No person shall offer or receive from any other person, including any licensee or any employee, agent or patron of a licensee: 
(1)  Money or other negotiable instrument for free replays of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine requiring some skill; 
(2)  Money or other negotiable instrument for any non-cash merchandise, prize, toy, gift certificate, or novelty received as a reward for playing any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine requiring some skill; or 
(3)  Money or other negotiable instrument as a reward for playing any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine requiring some skill. 
(Code 2002, § 7-7-18) 
Secs. 32-212—32-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - POOLROOMS (RESERVED) 

Secs. 32-231—32-253. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PEDDLING, SOLICITING, CANVASSING AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 32-254. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary (of, relating to, or supported by charity or alms) person, who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the general public, any part of which contributions is used for charitable purposes. 
Charitable purpose means any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose for religion, health, education, social welfare, arts and humanities, environment, civic, or public interest. 
Contribution means the promise or grant of any money or property of any kind or value. 
Regulatory fee means payments, whether designated as license fees, registration fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
Solicitation, solicitation of funds or solicit means the request or acceptance directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance, or any other thing of value. 
Solicitor includes any person who solicits orders or donations door-to-door or house-to-house on behalf of a business, individual, charitable organization, vocation or occupation. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-1) 
Sec. 32-255. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Persons, businesses and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law, or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the State of Georgia, are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit organizations or corporations registered with the Georgia secretary of state, or tax-exempt organizations which have been recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department, shall be treated as exempt from the regulatory fee provisions of this article, provided that such organization first supplies proof of the recognized status to the city administrator or other designated city representative and has received from the city clerk written confirmation of its exempt status. In this subsection, the term "proof" shall include, but is not limited to, all documents and/or registrations required by the Georgia secretary of state pursuant to the Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988 (O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.) and any applicable state or federal regulations as the same may be amended from time to time. The charitable or nonprofit organization shall furnish each of its agents or representatives with a copy of the city's confirmation letter. Any organization qualifying under this section shall be required to obtain a solicitor's permit from the city pursuant to section 32-265. The organization shall furnish the city administrator and the chief of police with a list of such agents or representatives, and shall promptly notify these city representatives of changes in the list. Such list will contain the names, residential addresses, and dates of birth of the agents or representatives. 
(c)  Any sales representative who calls upon prospective customers at their prior invitation shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any sales representative who does not demand, accept or receive payments in advance of final delivery and who has had, for the previous six months, a regularly established place of business or permanent residence in the county from which the sales representative transacts business or solicits orders on a continuing and ongoing basis within the county, shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this article. Any person who is exempt under this subsection must be soliciting orders only for goods capable of being delivered at one time and must have on such person proper identification which substantiates the claim to an exemption. In this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, or driver's license, but shall not include a birth certificate. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-2) 
Sec. 32-256. - Violation of other ordinances and laws. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person while engaging in any activity for which a permit is required by this article to: 
(1)  Violate any city ordinance; 
(2)  Solicit within an established fire zone of the city; 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state, or violate any state or federal consumer protection law. 
(b)  In this section, the term "consumer protection law" includes the Fair Business Practices Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.), the Federal Consumer Credit Protection Act, and the Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988 (O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.). 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-3) 
Sec. 32-257. - Hours of operation. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the conduct for which a permit is required by this article between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., according to the standard time in effect. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-4) 
Sec. 32-258. - Restriction on number of persons soliciting. 
It is unlawful for more than two individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or services, or religious or charitable purpose. Each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this provision shall be deemed to have violated this section. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-5) 
Sec. 32-259. - Persons with criminal records. 
It is unlawful for any person with a criminal record as described in section 32-271, whether or not otherwise eligible for an exemption under section 32-255, to engage in any of the activities for which a permit is required by this article. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-6) 
Sec. 32-260. - Frequency of solicitation of same premises. 
It is unlawful for any person and/or organization to make more than one solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services within any consecutive two-week period, without receiving a prior invitation therefore from the occupant of any such premises. This section includes solicitation upon the same premises of any person or entity by employees, agents or representatives more than once during such period without a prior invitation. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-7) 
Sec. 32-261. - Solicitation to be at main entrance. 
It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a place of residence at any entrance or part of the building other than the main entrance to the residence. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-8) 
Sec. 32-262. - Announced purpose of call. 
At each dwelling, whether it is an apartment unit or private residence, the solicitor shall inform the occupant in truthful unambiguous terms of the purpose of the call and shall not represent that the solicitor is participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that the solicitor is offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-9) 
Sec. 32-263. - Identification to prospective customers. 
It is unlawful for any person, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer, to fail to verbally identify himself for the purpose of the solicitation, and the company and product line or charitable organization and cause represented. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-10) 
Sec. 32-264. - Fraud, misrepresentation, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation to misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation or use any false or deceptive statements or any misrepresentation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plan or scheme which misrepresents the status or purpose of the person conducting the solicitation. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-11) 
Sec. 32-265. - Permit required. 
Any person engaged in or desiring to engage in any type of selling, soliciting, canvassing, survey-making or any other business, occupation or vocation, which by its nature requires going from door-to-door or house-to-house in the residential and/or commercial areas of the city, whether on a temporary or a permanent basis and whether or not it is for any religious, charitable, nonprofit or profit-making organization, shall obtain a city solicitor's permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-12) 
Sec. 32-266. - Application for permit; questionnaire. 
(a)  The city clerk shall prepare a written questionnaire requiring pertinent information regarding the physical description, identity, and background of each applicant for a permit, to include the following: 
(1)  Name, local address and telephone number; 
(2)  Date and place of birth; 
(3)  Driver's license number and issuing state; 
(4)  Race and sex; 
(5)  Height and weight; 
(6)  Eye color and hair color; 
(7)  Name, address and telephone number of the organization represented; 
(8)  Name and telephone number of immediate supervisor; 
(9)  Description of product/service or charitable cause; 
(10)  The applicant shall provide photo identification (i.e., drivers license, military I.D., etc.); a copy shall be retained by city; 
(11)  A list of all arrests, convictions and the disposition of each charge, other than minor traffic violations; 
(12)  The form shall bear a properly notarized signature of the applicant. 
(b)  The questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: 
"Georgia Code Section 16-10-71 provides that a person who makes a lawful oath or affirmation or who executes a document knowing that it purports to be acknowledgment of a lawful oath or affirmation commits the offense of false swearing when, in any matter or thing other than a judicial proceeding, he knowingly and willfully makes a false statement." 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-13) 
Sec. 32-267. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon filing of an application for a solicitor's permit, the city administrator shall review the application for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has plead to, or has been convicted of, a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the application has been properly completed and all required documents have been provided, and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas of conviction, the city administrator or other authorized representative shall approve the application. 
(b)  In any case in which it appears to the city administrator that a solicitor's permit should not be issued to an applicant, the city administrator shall so inform the applicant, and upon the applicant's request, shall furnish the applicant with a reasonably detailed written statement of the reasons why the permit will not be issued. This written statement shall be provided to the applicant within 48 hours of the city administrator's decision. 
(c)  Following approval of the permit application and prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee as established by the city council. The regulatory fee under this article is $125.00 per application. 
(d)  Upon payment of the regulatory fee, the applicant shall receive from the city administrator a copy of the regulatory fee certificate and a solicitor's permit. In addition, the city shall provide the applicant with an identification card bearing the applicant's name, organization, and identifying the applicant as a solicitor. The identification card shall also bear the signature of the city administrator and the date of issuance and expiration. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-14) 
Sec. 32-268. - Expiration and renewal. 
Each solicitor's permit shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is one month from the date of issue. Application for renewal may be made at any time following the seventh day preceding the date of expiration. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-15) 
Sec. 32-269. - Selling, renting, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person to lend, rent or sell a solicitor's permit and/or identification card to another. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-16) 
Sec. 32-270. - Display of identification card. 
The city administrator shall furnish to each holder of a solicitor's permit a device suitable for attaching the identification card to the solicitor's outer clothing. No person shall act as a solicitor without wearing and displaying the identification card in a conspicuous manner. Such a person shall display such identification to any authorized person or potential customer upon request. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-17) 
Sec. 32-271. - Denial; suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No solicitor's permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of any misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five years prior to the date of application, nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted of a felony, except that a permit may be issued to a convicted felon if it appears that such person either has been pardoned, or that such person has been free from any legal restriction for a period of five or more years prior to the date of application. In this section, the terms "conviction" and "found guilty" include verdicts or pleas of guilty, entered by a court of this state, a court of any sister state, or any federal district court. Any permit issued as the result of willful false statements or omissions in the solicitor's application for the permit shall be deemed null and void from the time of its issue. 
(b)  The permit of any solicitor charged with a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude shall be deemed suspended from the time of lawful arrest, formal accusation or indictment, whichever shall first occur; such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charge is dismissed, dead-docketed, nol-prossed or no-billed. 
(c)  The permit of any solicitor who is convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or violence, shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. The permit of any solicitor convicted of having violated any provision of this article after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. 
(d)  Any suspension or revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor while such person's permit has been suspended or after it has been revoked. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-18) 
Sec. 32-272. - Surrender. 
Each solicitor's permit shall remain the property of the city. Each permit holder shall surrender the permit and identification card to the city administrator no later than three business days following the expiration, suspension or revocation of the permit or upon the demand of the city, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-19) 
Sec. 32-273. - Appeals. 
A person whom the city administrator refuses to issue a solicitor's permit or whose solicitor's permit is suspended or revoked may appeal to the city council at its next regularly scheduled public meeting. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-20) 
Sec. 32-274. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city administrator and city police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to solicitor's permits are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city administrator, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants to inspect all permits issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the permit held is the proper one for the solicitation sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 2002, § 7-5-22) 
Secs. 32-275—32-296. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 

Sec. 32-297. - License required; compliance to provisions. 
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or operate the business of buying precious metals and/or stones without having first obtained a license as is provided herein; or in violation of any of the provisions herein contained. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the mayor and council for any violations of any provision of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 7-4-1) 
Sec. 32-298. - Application; investigation. 
Application for a license shall be made to the city clerk and shall state thereon the name of the applicant; the place of business; and the number of employees intended to be engaged. The chief of police or any other officer of the city designated by the mayor and council shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report back to the city clerk whether or not such applicant is a person of good character. No license shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. 
(Code 2002, § 7-4-2) 
Sec. 32-299. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a precious metal and stone transaction license shall be $100.00, which shall be payable in advance. No license shall be issued until the fee is paid. 
(Code 2002, § 7-4-3) 
Sec. 32-300. - Records of purchases; retention period. 
Each holder of such a license doing business in the city shall keep a record of every article sold to him and this record shall be open to the inspection of any city police officer at any time during normal business hours. The license holder shall be required to fill out a form copy, furnished by the police department, which will furnish the city with a complete physical description of the seller, item or items sold, and a thumb print of the seller. The license holder shall be required to keep items purchased for at least seven days before remounting or melting them or cutting them up. Such items purchased may not be removed to another location during the seven-day period. The license holder must furnish on the form to be provided by the city police department the address, phone number and either driver's license number or social security number of each person from whom items are purchased by the license holder. 
(Code 2002, § 7-4-4) 
Sec. 32-301. - Valuable items, defined. 
Precious metal and stone transactions, as used herein, shall be defined as including any item or items of gold or silver content, or any precious metal including class rings, silver dollars, necklaces, wedding bands, gold watches, dental gold, gold rings, silver rings, silverware, silver sets, silver coins, diamonds, old foreign coins or any other items which are deemed to have valuable metal or stone content. 
(Code 2002, § 7-4-5) 
Sec. 32-302. - Minors. 
No license holder shall have any business dealings with any person less than 18 years of age, except with the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to each particular transaction. No license shall be issued to any person who is not 18 years of age or over. 
(Code 2002, § 7-4-6) 
Sec. 32-303. - Reports of suspected stolen items. 
It shall be the duty of every license holder to report to the city police department any article sold to him if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost, and found by the person attempting to sell it to the license holder. 
(Code 2002, § 7-4-7) 
Sec. 32-304. - License additional to other licenses. 
The license to engage in the business of buying precious metal and stones must be issued in addition to any other license and/or certificate to conduct business in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-4-8) 
Secs. 32-305—32-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - EVENT CENTER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-330. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Event center means a properly licensed business that uses or rents or charges a fee for a commercial business premises, building, structure or location for the primary intended purpose of hosting or conducting parties, social gatherings or other social events. Excluded from this definition are restaurants serving prepared food, city buildings and places of worship/churches. 
Security detail means an off-duty P.O.S.T. certified peace officer employed by the owner of the premises or employed by the renter of the event center to provide security at the party or gathering. The owner and/or renter of the premises shall be responsible for paying the fees of security personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11-01 , § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 32-331. - Event attendance; security detail required. 
All event centers are required to provide a security detail at any party or other social gathering taking place on the premises in accordance with the requirements listed below. The number of officers required in the security detail is based upon the number of people attending the event or party. 

 
(Ord. No. 2018-11-01 , § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 32-332. - Service and sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
Service and/or sale of alcoholic beverages at event centers is prohibited unless the business owner or renter possesses a valid alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. Pursuant to chapter 4, article II, section 4-35(b) of the City Code, only restaurants (as defined by City Code) are permitted to obtain a license to sell and serve malt beverages and wine by the drink for on-premises consumption. 
A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer holding a valid off-premises license issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2 is authorized to sell and serve malt beverages and wine at event centers following compliance with O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11-01 , § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 32-333. - No activity in parking lots. 
Parties or social gatherings at event centers shall be conducted solely inside the business premises. The owner and/or renter of the premises shall not permit gatherings or congregations of attendees in parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11-01 , § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 32-334. - Noise restrictions. 
The owner and/or renter of the premises shall comply with chapter 26, article III, section 26-86 of the City Code with regard to noise generated by invitees or live music, a band, stage performance or DJ. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11-01 , § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Sec. 32-335. - Penalties for violation. 
Violations of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days. Repeated violations of this article may also result in the revocation of the owner's or renter's occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11-01 , § 2, 11-20-2018) 
Chapter 34 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Telecommunications towers, O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 66B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: 
(1)  Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; 
(2)  Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; 
(3)  Each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and 
(4)  Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; 
provided that the term "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the telecommunications system in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than five percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). The term "control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to: 
(1)  Furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; 
(2)  Provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or 
(3)  Transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in section 34-2(b). 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 USC 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 USC 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that the term "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications system means the system in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-1) 
Sec. 34-2. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or private telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this chapter to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this chapter. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: 
(1)  May be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services; 
(2)  Shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed 500 linear feet; or 
(3)  Shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. 
In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this subsection, then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(c)  The city council may grant one or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(g)  The grant of franchises and revocable licenses to persons providing telecommunications services by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-2(a)) 
Secs. 34-3—34-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-23—34-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 34-48. - Applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or date of birth; copy of the applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by the applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity; 
d.  For purposes of determining whether an applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law, a detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for any conclusions by such lending institution or funding source regarding the applicant's financial ability to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city; and 
e.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system in compliance with the policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiaries, and the areas served by such systems; 
(3)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a detailed description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
b.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; and 
c.  For purposes of assisting the city in determining whether the telecommunications system will be constructed in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets, a detailed statement setting forth the provisions in any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to such person, firm, or corporation constructing, or assisting the applicant with the construction of, the telecommunications system in the streets; and 
(4)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(c)  Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $2,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $2,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city may reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-2(b)) 
Sec. 34-49. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-2(c)) 
Sec. 34-50. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-2(d)) 
Sec. 34-51. - Evaluation criteria. 
(a)  An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors and such terms, conditions and other factors as the city council deems appropriate and not prohibited by applicable law: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any in-kind facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The financial and technical ability of the applicant to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or the Federal Communications Commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise, the public health, safety and welfare, and the city's management of streets; and 
(5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(b)  In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services and in accordance with applicable law, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-2(e)) 
Sec. 34-52. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the applications, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearings in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this article and applicable law, including 47 USC 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 34-51. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-2(f)) 
Secs. 34-53—34-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TERMS AND REVOCATION 

Sec. 34-78. - Terms and conditions. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)  The term of the franchise or revocable license; provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five years; 
(2)  The franchise area under the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the grantee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise or revocable license; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise or revocable license; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-2(g)) 
Sec. 34-79. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than 500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-9-2(h)) 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1 and 40-6-1 through 40-6-397, known as the "uniform rules of the road," are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city, with like effect as if recited in full herein. 
(Code 2002, § 8-1-1; Ord. No. 001-002-2011, § 3, 2-8-2011) 
Sec. 36-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, festivals and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate the regulations shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 2002, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 36-3. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver of his vehicle, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to repeatedly pass a fixed point or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 2002, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 36-4. - Speed limits established. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic volume and use thereof, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
(b)  Thirty miles per hour shall be the maximum speed on all streets or portions of streets within the city unless otherwise indicated by officially posted signs designating the maximum vehicular speed upon those streets as approved by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Special speed zones and special speed limits shall be established by the mayor and city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in a schedule maintained in the office of the city clerk. No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of the maximum speed limits. 
(Code 2002, § 8-2-2; Ord. No. 001-002-2011, § 4, 2-8-2011) 
Sec. 36-5. - Traffic signs, signals and markings. 
All traffic shall obey and be directed by official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 8-2-3) 
Sec. 36-6. - Tracked vehicles prohibited on streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any tracked or other vehicle having metal tracks or wheels upon the city streets. 
(Code 2002, § 8-2-4) 
Sec. 36-7. - Driver's ability impaired. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city while the driver's ability to operate such vehicle is impaired by fatigue, drowsiness, the ingestion of legally prescribed drugs or the consumption of any other substances not by law declared contraband. 
(Code 2002, § 8-2-5) 
Sec. 36-8. - Spinning tires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to intentionally cause the wheels of a motor vehicle to spin so as to create a loud and vexatious noise which is audible at a distance of more than 100 yards from such vehicle. 
(Code 2002, § 8-2-6) 
Sec. 36-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The police department of the city shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter through the issuance of appropriate citations and/or arrests. 
(b)  In the exercise of these duties, the police department is authorized to use any appropriate speed detection devices whether hand-held or attached to a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 001-002-2011, § 5(8-2-8), 2-8-2011) 
Secs. 36-10—36-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 36-37. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices; schedule. 
(a)  The police chief or a designee thereof, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(6)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; and 
(7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The police chief or a designee thereof is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; and 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in this article, this schedule, and any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the mayor and council and this schedule is hereby incorporated herein and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 8-1-4) 
Secs. 36-38—36-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 

Sec. 36-63. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a parking space is marked off on any highway or other roadway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 2002, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 36-64. - Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city specifically designated by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Code 2002, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 36-65. - Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Code 2002, § 8-3-3) 
Sec. 36-66. - Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city, at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Code 2002, § 8-3-4) 
Sec. 36-67. - Special purpose parking zones established, parking otherwise prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any locations on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 8-3-5) 
Sec. 36-68. - Trucks parked on right-of-way. 
No person, firm or corporation shall park or cause to be parked a truck, trailer, mobile home, camper, pole trailer or other motor vehicle having a length of more than 35 feet and/or a width of more than eight feet upon the right-of-way of any of the public streets and roadways of the city between the time of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except that such motor vehicle may be so parked for a period of not more than 30 minutes provided the same is illuminated and at all times under the care and attendance of a licensed motor vehicle operator. 
(Code 2002, § 8-3-6) 
Secs. 36-69—36-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROAD SYSTEM REGULATION 

Sec. 36-95. - Title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "City of Wrens Road System Regulation Ordinance." 
(Code 2002, § 8-4-1) 
Sec. 36-96. - Purpose. 
This article is made, adopted, and enacted for the physical, social, and economic growth of the city as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and for the purpose of protecting the public investment in rights-of-way, road beds, ditches, bridges, and improvements of the city road system. 
(Code 2002, § 8-4-2) 
Sec. 36-97. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bobtail is a term which describes a tractor trailer truck possessing ten wheels or more without a trailer attached. 
City road system means all roads, streets and roadways owned by the city and operated and maintained for the travel and convenience of the public. This definition shall include all bridges, culverts, ditches, drainage structures, rights-of-way, sidewalks, and appurtenances, and improvements to the city roads. 
Residence district means the territory contiguous to the property on such road in the main improved area with residences or a residence for a distance of 300 feet or more; includes the term "residential district." 
Residential streets means those streets in a residence district. 
Road means the entire width between the boundary of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of vehicular travel; includes the terms "street" and "highway." 
(Code 2002, § 8-4-3) 
Sec. 36-98. - Route of travel, through trucks. 
For the purpose of delivery or transport of goods, articles or wares, all heavily laden trucks or delivery vehicles shall proceed over county, state, or federal routes or designated truck routes for delivery or transport of such goods, articles, or wares, except as provided herein. 
(1)  All trucks or delivery vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 17,500 pounds, including the load thereon, or having an overall length of 30 feet, except vehicles designated to carry passengers, are prohibited from using or parking on any street or road within the city, which is so posted, or on any residential street in the city road system, except those authorized and designated as truck routes by ordinance or resolution, except when the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters, or place of pick up or delivery for the restricted vehicle is not on a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from such places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage, headquarters, or place of pickup or delivery and the nearest designated truck route. Also exempt from this article are tractor trailer owner/operators which shall be allowed to "bobtail" to their place of residence by the most direct route to their residence as required by this article. 
(2)  The weight limitations provided for in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to vehicles and equipment of the city or the state or under contract with either for the construction, repair, and maintenance of roads and bridges in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 8-4-4) 
Sec. 36-99. - Inspection authorized. 
Any person driving or in charge or control of any truck or delivery vehicle that is being operated on any street or road within the city where the operation of any trucks or delivery vehicles have been restricted under any provisions of this article shall be prepared to present for inspection by the chief of police or any police officer the truck or delivery vehicle log book, weight slips, delivery slips, or other written evidence of the destination and point of origin of the truck or delivery vehicle to justify the presence of the restricted truck or delivery vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(Code 2002, § 8-4-5) 
Sec. 36-100. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Each and every day that any such violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(b)  The imposition of any such fine or imprisonment, or both, for any violation of this article shall not excuse the violation or allow it to continue; and all such violators shall be required to correct or remedy such violations within the time as prescribed by the court having jurisdiction of such matter, and, in the absence of any such completion time being fixed by the court, within a reasonable time after such violations occur. 
(c)  The chief of police of the city or any city police officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 8-4-6) 
Secs. 36-101—36-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES 

Sec. 36-129. - Parades; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, conduct or accompany any organized parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property in the city unless an application has been previously filed and a permit granted to conduct such parade or procession within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 7-10-1) 
Sec. 36-130. - Application for parade permit. 
An application for permit to conduct or sponsor a parade or procession shall be filed with the city administrator in writing and shall contain the following information furnished by the person organizing and directing the proposed parade or procession: 
(1)  The name of all organizations or persons organizing or sponsoring the parade or procession; 
(2)  The purpose of the parade or procession; 
(3)  The date and designated hours of the parade or procession; 
(4)  The proposed route of the parade or procession, including its beginning and termination points; 
(5)  The number and types of vehicles, marching units and floats to be used in the parade or procession; and 
(6)  The number of persons participating in the parade or procession. 
(Code 2002, § 7-10-2) 
Sec. 36-131. - Investigation. 
The city administrator shall investigate all applications for parade permits, and may issue permits where the information specified in section 36-130 has been furnished, provided the proposed parade or procession is otherwise lawful and can be held without undue interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the city. The city administrator shall exercise his discretion in making this determination. 
(Code 2002, § 7-10-3) 
Secs. 36-132—36-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 36-161. - Use enforcement. 
No person under the age of 16 years shall operate or be a passenger on a bicycle on a highway, street, bicycle path or sidewalk under the jurisdiction of the city without wearing a bicycle helmet. 
(Code 2002, § 7-6-1) 
Sec. 36-162. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, the term "bicycle helmet" means a piece of protective headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standards for bicycle helmets set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). For the purpose of this article, a person shall be deemed to be wearing a bicycle helmet only if a bicycle helmet of good fit is fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet. 
(Code 2002, § 7-6-2) 
Sec. 36-163. - Penalty. 
A person under the age of 16 years failing to comply with this article shall have his bicycle impounded by the city police. The parent or lawful custodian of the child may then retrieve the bicycle by going to the police department and showing proof that the child now has a bicycle helmet or by indicating that the child will not ride the bicycle in the future without a helmet. Proof of ownership of a bicycle helmet may be the helmet itself or a receipt documenting the purchase of a bicycle helmet. 
(Code 2002, § 7-6-3) 
Secs. 36-164—36-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 36-195. - Title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "City of Wrens Abandonment of Vehicles Regulation Ordinance." 
(Code 2002, § 8-5-1) 
Sec. 36-196. - Purpose. 
In the city vehicles are or may be abandoned in the future in the streets and other places within the city. There are or may in the future be dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, non-operating or discarded vehicles left about the city other than in junk yards or other appropriate places. Such conditions tend to impede traffic in the streets or interfere with the enjoyment of and reduce the value of private property; invite plundering; create fire hazards and other safety and health hazards to children as well as adults; and interfere with the comfort and general welfare of the public. This article is adopted for the physical and economic growth of the city as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and for the purpose of protecting the public. Adequate protection of the public health, safety and welfare requires that such conditions be regulated, abated or prohibited. 
(Code 2002, § 8-5-2) 
Sec. 36-197. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than by human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, mobile home, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Code 2002, § 8-5-3) 
Sec. 36-198. - Abandonment of vehicles. 
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Code 2002, § 8-5-4) 
Sec. 36-199. - Leaving of wrecked, non-operating vehicle on street. 
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 8-5-5) 
Sec. 36-200. - Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles. 
No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 72 hours, except that this article shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 8-5-6) 
Sec. 36-201. - Impounding. 
The chief of police or any duly designated officer of the city is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
(Code 2002, § 8-5-7) 
Sec. 36-202. - Penalties. 
Each day a violation of this article is committed or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 2002, § 8-5-8) 
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Theft of utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Disconnection of service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to disconnect gas, water or sewerage lines without the express consent of the city administrator or his designee. 
(Code 2002, § 5-1-1) 
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE 

Sec. 38-21. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted the water and sewer rate schedules as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. Copies of the current rate schedules shall be maintained on file in the offices of the city clerk and the city public works director. 
(b)  The rate schedule contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, one-farm dwelling with appurtenances, or one-commercial operation. 
(c)  Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, industrial users, and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the mayor and council on recommendation of the city's engineer. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-1) 
Sec. 38-22. - Application for water and sewer service. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at the city hall and at the same time shall make separate cash security deposits as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council for water service and for sewer service. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-2) 
Sec. 38-23. - Charges for initial water and sewer service. 
Each consumer subscribing to use the water and sewer service of the city shall pay connection fees for water service and for sewer service in such amounts as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-3) 
Sec. 38-24. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-4) 
Sec. 38-25. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 38-23, will be made for a five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee above will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or back-flow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-5) 
Sec. 38-26. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, member of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use the water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefore, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state department of natural resources. Any individual who desires to connect any plumbing work with any city water system, sanitary or storm sewers or sewage disposal system of any kind or install fixtures or appliances in new or existing systems, structures or premises, or repair or add to any existing plumbing, shall first make application to the city and obtain the required permit. All plumbing work shall be performed only by a state-licensed plumber. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building inspector without a permit, provided such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the building codes adopted by the city. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-6; Ord. No. 001-006-2012, § 3, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 38-27. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-7) 
Sec. 38-28. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given in writing at city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-8) 
Sec. 38-29. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on the 13th day of the month following the month in which service was provided. Bills will be due and payable on the first day of the next month. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment for five days after the original due date will result in the assessment of a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment for ten days after the original due date will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property, provided that no water service shall be discontinued until a notice is issued and an opportunity provided for the delinquent consumer to be heard regarding the delinquent account. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after the original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate the service, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under this article. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills and/or penalties are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made, and a service charge as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council paid for each meter reconnected. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-9; Ord. No. 02-012-2008, § 3, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 001-004-2011, § 3, 4-12-2011) 
Sec. 38-30. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills are paid in full, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the consumer's account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill and/or penalties, the city may proceed to collect the balance of the account in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to discontinue water and sewer service without notice to the consumer for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules and regulations; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal process; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; and/or 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, acts of God or unavoidable accident. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-10) 
Sec. 38-31. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for such fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the average of his previous 12 months of usage and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-11) 
Sec. 38-32. - Sewage connection required where available. 
(a)  All property owners in the city so situated as to be accessible to the city sewage system shall be and are hereby required to connect with and use the city sewage system for the disposal of sewage. This shall apply to all properties having residences or places of business from which sewage is disposed of, where the city sewage system is available to such properties. 
(b)  The use of septic tanks, open privies or other means of disposal of sewage shall be a nuisance and may be condemned and abated as such. 
(Code 2002, § 5-2-12) 
Sec. 38-33. - Drilling of private water wells. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the city water department. 
Well means any means of drawing groundwater for use or consumption. 
(b)  The drilling of private wells within the city is prohibited. 
(c)  All new construction within the city requiring water service is required to be connected to the city's water system. 
(d)  No water system supplied by a private water source is permitted to be connected to the city's water system. 
(Ord. No. 02-007-2002, § 5-2-13, 7-9-2002) 
Secs. 38-34—38-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-55. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system, which receives the lowest discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Cooking establishments means those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching; also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having, or using water and other elated services furnished by the city of the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through said system. Said terms shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Discoloration means a stain, spot, or tint that is obvious in appearance and occurs with increasing frequency and is different from the ordinary wastewater color or tint. This type of discoloration is caused by, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Fats, oils, and greases means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pre-treated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Grease trap or interceptor means a device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect settable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps and interceptors are sometimes referred to herein as "grease interceptors." 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the county board of commissioners and their duly appointed assistants. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing process, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary sewage. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
Minimum design capability means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Non-cooking establishments means those establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking. Non-cooking establishments include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving establishments. 
Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more then 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD5 is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorous is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 20 mg/l, and the total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Pit privy means a shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch or (1.27 centimeters in any dimension). 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out. 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present. Referred to also as "wastewater." 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. Referred to also as "water pollution control plant" and "wastewater treatment plant." 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage, often used as synonymous with "wastewater facilities" and "water pollution control facilities." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain, sometimes termed "storm sewer," means a drain or sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the public works director of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtration as approved by EPA and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Water pollution control facilities. See Wastewater facilities. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
User means the party who is billed, usually for sewer services, from a single connection; has no reference to the number of persons served. Also called "customer." 
User charge means the charge paid by each user to defray, at a minimum, the operating and maintenance cost of the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 1, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 38-56. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so. Detached garages and accessory buildings used for storage of tools and equipment are not required to have sanitary facilities. 
(e)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer, provided that, where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health department may be used. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 2, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-57—38-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-86. - When required; permit; operation and maintenance. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not reasonably available under the provisions of section 38-56, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the rules and regulations of the city and the state department of human resources. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The applications for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee for residential and for commercial buildings shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be conducted by the superintendent within 48 hours, excepting weekends and legal holidays, of receipt of applicant's written notice directed to the superintendent. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all directives of the department of public health of the state and ordinances of the city. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 40,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 38-56, a direct connection to the public sewer shall be mandatory within 30 days after the private system has been cited by the health officer as a health hazard, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a proper sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. Pumping of septic tanks shall be carried out by licensed pumping contractors. 
(g)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(h)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state department of public health or the city. 
(i)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved. 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply. 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 3, §§ 3.1—3.9, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 38-87. - Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system. 
(a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw, or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catch basin, or other opening into the city sewer system the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided in section 38-150. 
(b)  Permits. The superintendent is hereby authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the superintendent and under his supervision. Such permits may be revoked at any time if in the opinion of the superintendent continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
(c)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks as established by the city. A record shall be kept of such dumpings and statements rendered at the first of each month. The amount of such statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within such ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 3, § 3.10, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-88—38-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 38-118. - Permit required; discharge notifications; sewer specifications. 
(a)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  Any person or business proposing a new discharge into the public sewage system or a greater than ten percent change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the city at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. Proposed discharges greater than 25,000 gpd shall be reviewed by the city during the planning phase of the project to ensure adequate capacity is available. 
(c)  Any person proposing those actions described in subsection (b) of this section shall make application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as set by the city shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(d)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, maintenance, and repair of the building sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(e)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The city will not be responsible for any property damage resulting from inadequate service line capacity, grade, or size for such single connection. 
(f)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(g)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city supervision: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints. The superintendent may require sewer lines that may be exposed to damage by tree roots be cast iron soil type or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
a.  Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C-564. 
b.  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
c.  PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber "O" ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. 
d.  Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the superintendent. 
(6)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall at the owner's expense cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(7)  Each service line connecting to the public sewer shall have installed the appropriate clean-out structure at the right-of-way or easement limit. The private sewer service line shall then be installed with clean-outs located at every directional change and at intervals not to exceed 90 feet. 
(h)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building sewer line is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building sewer line shall be lifted by pumps or other approved means and discharged to the public sewer. 
(i)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(k)  All excavation for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a like condition in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(l)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(m)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. All such connections shall be made gastight, watertight, and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(n)  If any individual sewer service line allows the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the sewer service line. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system until necessary repairs are completed and the entrance of infiltration and inflow is stopped. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 4, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-119—38-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 38-150. - General regulations. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on written approval of the superintendent and the state environmental protection division to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to discharge any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treat-ability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit and 65 degrees Celsius. 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum, oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit and 65 degrees Celsius. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  All industrial discharges to the city sewer system that do not comply with the federal industrial pretreatment standards (40 CFR 403) and those industrial pretreatment standards developed by the state environmental protection division applicable to the user. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing taste- or odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with the applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined in section 38-55. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.  Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions which cannot be removed by the treatment process, which consequently impairs color to the treatment plants effluent, thereby creating objectionable conditions in the receiving stream which interfere with the streams designated use. 
c.  Unusual BOD (above 300 mg/l), chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 5, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-151—38-168. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FATS, OILS AND GREASES CONTROL 

Sec. 38-169. - Interceptor regulations. 
(a)  The scope and purpose of this section is to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases into the city sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. 
(b)  Grease interceptor maintenance, recordkeeping, and grease removal. Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as required by the superintendent or his designee. Grease interceptors shall be installed at the user's expense, when such user operates a cooking establishment. Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooking or cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments when they are deemed necessary by the health officer or superintendent for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease. No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from subject grease interceptor to exceed 325 milligrams per liter, as identified by method EPA Method 1664, or 275 milligrams per liter, as identified by EPA method 413. All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and capacity approved by the superintendent or his designee and shall be readily and easily accessible for user cleaning and city inspection. All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less often than every 30 days. Users who are required to pass water through a grease interceptor shall: 
(1)  Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24 minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate as predicted by the Uniform Plumbing Code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles with 20 percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified hereafter as a "sludge pocket." 
(2)  Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as required, but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the user's expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor. 
(3)  Accept the following conditions: If any skimmed or pumped wastes or other materials removed from grease interceptor are treated in any fashion onsite and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an activity of and after said onsite treatment, the user shall be responsible for the attainment of established grease numerical limit described in this subsection (b) on all discharges of wastewater from said grease interceptor into the city sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
(4)  Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to maintain said device such that attainment of the grease limit is consistently achieved. The term "consistent" means any wastewater sample taken from said grease interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment described in this subsection (b). If an establishment desires, because of documented space constraints, an alternate to an out-of-building grease interceptor, the request for an alternative location shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location of city sewer main and easement in relation to available exterior space outside building. 
b.  Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site. 
(5)  Understand and agree that the use of biological additives as a grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the health officer or superintendent. Any establishment using this method of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the trap's outlet, is consistently achieved. 
(6)  Understand and agree that the use of automatic grease removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the health officer or superintendent, the building inspector of the city and the county department of health. Any establishment using this equipment shall operate the system in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the unit's outlet, is consistently achieved. 
(7)  Understand and agree that the health officer or superintendent reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance, facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to, or modification or replacement of such traps. 
(8)  Maintain a written record of trap maintenance for the last three years. All such records will be available for inspection by the city at all times. 
(c)  No non-grease laden sources are allowed to be connected to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service. 
(d)  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each grease trap chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 6, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-170—38-191. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE 

Sec. 38-192. - Generally. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or knowingly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 7, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-193—38-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS 

Sec. 38-223. - Right of entry; safety regulations. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the property owner. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 8, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-224—38-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 38-255. - Generally. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the state. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city as a result of said violation. 
(b)  In the event of violation of this article, the health officer or the city may verbally instruct the property owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the property owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or the city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The written order shall be mailed via certified U.S. mail to the property owner's last known address and additionally a copy of the written order shall be hand-delivered to the subject building or property. If no person is available to accept the order at the building or property then it shall be posted at the primary entrance to the building or property. 
(c)  Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or the city pursuant to this article will constitute a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the state, provided that compliance with this ordinance is required notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued. 
(d)  The violation of any provisions of this article, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public nuisance, which is injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort, may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of a notice of violation of this article and/or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease, the owner or owners of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city council to present evidence challenging the validity of the city order. The owner may appear in person or by agent with or without an attorney. Said hearing demand must be filed with the city clerk within five days from receipt of the order being challenged. Upon receipt of a proper written demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time, and place for said hearing to be not less than 30 days from the date of filing said demand. The city's decision at said hearing will be a final decision. 
(f)  Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (e) of this section shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(g)  For the purposes of this article, the decisions of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health officer on any issue of sewage sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well being. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 9, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-256—38-273. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - SEWER EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 38-274. - When, where permitted. 
(a)  Construction of sewer mains and appurtenances by the city shall be limited to areas within the city or those areas outside the city which are being served by city water or gas, or as may be requested by area citizens. Sewer extensions will only be made if it is financially feasible, in the sole discretion of the city. 
(b)  Extensions of sewer lines as provided in subsection (a) of this section may be extended to property boundaries based on available funds and priorities established by the city. 
(c)  Sewer systems in newly established subdivisions may be connected to the city sewage works provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The collecting system within the subdivision and the connecting pipe to the public sewer are designed by a registered professional engineer of the state and approved by all applicable agencies. 
(2)  An application for approval of the proposed works shall be submitted to the city prior to start of construction. 
(3)  The volume of the collected wastes from the proposed system shall not cause any part of the sewage works to become overloaded. 
(4)  All costs applicable to the proposed works shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(5)  Approval of the completed sewage works must be obtained from the superintendent before the city shall assume responsibility of ownership. 
(6)  All proposed extensions shall be public extensions and shall be approved based on that extension's conformance to the city's standards and specifications as promulgated in this article. Prior to acceptance, all as-built plans, property rights-of-way and easements, and certifications of the owner's engineer shall be filed with the city for formal acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 10, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-275—38-296. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - RATES AND RESPONSIBILITY OF COSTS 

Sec. 38-297. - Generally. 
(a)  All property directly connected to the sewer system and served by sewage works shall be subject to fees in support of the construction, extension, and improvement of the public sanitary sewers, to be levied and collected in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. The cost of principal and interest, either bonded or otherwise, shall be borne to those users connected to the system. All new users shall be required to pay a connection fee or a "buy-in assessment" at a rate determined to be proportionate to existing user costs of capitalization of the facilities. 
(b)  The annual operating and maintenance cost of the sewer system shall be paid by the users of the system in proportion to their use. Charges for use of the system shall be based upon volume of wastewater discharged to the sewage works. 
(c)  The city shall establish a user rate in accordance with appropriate federal and state rules and regulations pertaining to the costs associated to the use of the sewer by residential, commercial, and individual users. 
(d)  Rates provided for within this article shall be established by the mayor and council and may be changed from time to time as required. 
(e)  Users intending to connect to the public sewer shall pay an initial hookup charge which shall be established by the city and may be changed from time to time as required. These hookup charges may be used for either pre-existing, current or future capital improvements. 
(f)  Hookup charges as hereinabove provided shall be payable in full prior to the start of construction for all additions, improvements to, and/or enlargements of existing buildings, or upon the start of the construction or installation of non-building or accessory structures directly and indirectly connected to the public sewer. 
(g)  All sums payable to the city under this article shall be secured by a lien on all real property and improvements intended to be served by the connection for which the payment is due in the manner and to the same effect as taxes are a lien upon real estate and shall be further secured by a lien on any commercial equipment the ordinary use and operation of which generates wastewater, and a lien on any and all furnishings, fixtures and equipment used in connection with the use and operation of such commercial equipment, to the same effect as taxes are a lien upon personal property. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 11, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-298—38-327. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES 

Sec. 38-328. - Enumerated; discharge prohibitions; permitted discharges. 
(a)  The following are considered industrial wastes and as such shall not be discharged to a public sanitary sewer, a storm sewer or a natural outlet: 
(1)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment plant exceeds the limits established by the superintendent or the industry user's National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) pretreatment permit for such materials. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent or the industry user's NPDES pretreatment permit as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(3)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent or the industry user's NPDES pretreatment permit in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(5)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.  Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions which cannot be removed by the treatment process, which consequently impairs color to the treatment plants effluent, thereby creating objectionable conditions in the receiving stream which interfere with the streams designated use. 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works, may cause the effluent limitations of the discharge permit to be exceeded. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein. 
(b)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(c)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 38-297. 
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plans and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws and the municipal discharge permit. Further, such pretreatment installations must be consistent with and in compliance with the requirements of any state pretreatment permit issued to the industry user. The industry user shall provide the city with copies of the pretreatment permit and the monthly discharge monitoring reports upon request of the superintendent. 
(d)  Should it become necessary to modify the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section to either protect the sewer system, the sewage treatment plant, or the receiving waters; or to provide for the acceptance of wastes not currently accepted, this article shall be amended accordingly. 
(e)  Sampling of waters and wastes discharged to public sewers to ensure compliance with this article shall occur at the point of the connection to the public sewer. 
(f)  New industry seeking to locate in the city or existing industry users proposing to expand operations in the city shall notify the superintendent of its proposal to discharge water and waste to the public sewer. Following notification, a planning meeting shall be conducted by the city for all proposed discharges greater than normal wastewater as defined in section 38-55. In the interest of the industry user, this planning meeting should be conducted by the city near the beginning of the planning phase. 
(g)  Any industry user that is not satisfying the requirements of this article at the time of its adoption shall within ten days submit a written explanation to the city of why it cannot comply with the provisions of this article and shall further provide a written schedule outlining its plans to obtain compliance with the provisions of this article. The city will endeavor to work in good faith with the industry user but the city will not jeopardize operation of the wastewater treatment plant and wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 12, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-329—38-359. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE 

Sec. 38-360. - City's right to terminate service. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater. 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority. 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process. 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due. 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(b)  Discontinuance of service for failure to comply. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: A written notice, signed by the superintendent, shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes which violate the city ordinances. In the event that the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible party. The party notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the offending conditions. If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the above notice and if circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the superintendent, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then he may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 13, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-361—38-378. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 38-379. - Generally. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. All non-residential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in 40 CFR 403. 
(Ord. No. 01-04-2004, art. 14, 4-13-2004) 
Secs. 38-380—38-401. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS SERVICE 

Sec. 38-402. - Specifications for system construction. 
The standard specifications of the City of Wrens Operations and Maintenance Procedures Manual for the construction of natural gas systems shall be complied with unless other procedures, or methods or specifications are specified by federal law, city ordinance or this article. A copy of such standard specifications shall be maintained on file in the office of the city gas superintendent. 
(Code 2002, § 5-3-1; Ord. No. 001-012-2008, § 3(5-3-1), 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 001-010-2010, § 3(5-3-1), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 38-403. - Initial service. 
(a)  Every person, firm, partnership or corporation who can be served by the city will be served natural gas under the city's policies, regulations and rates. The size of the service and appurtenances used to serve each customer shall be such that they will render efficient service to the customer. 
(b)  Any prospective customer who desires natural gas service and will be using natural gas for space heating and one yearround natural gas appliance where the city has an existing main, will be furnished up to 75 feet of service line and the necessary fitting, valves, meter and regulator by the city for such charge as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. In the event the customer's inlet is over 75 feet from the city's main, an additional charge per lineal foot of three-fourths-inch service line will be made by the city for that amount of the service line exceeding 75 feet. 
(c)  Any prospective customer who desires natural gas service and will be using natural gas for space heating and one yearround natural gas appliance where the city does not have a main available will be furnished 200 feet of two-inch main by the city free of charge. For an additional main in excess of 200 feet the city will charge such rate per lineal foot as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, in addition to the charges as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Subsections (b) and (c) of this section apply only to a customer using natural gas for a natural gas furnace and one of the following yearround natural gas appliances: water heater, range, oven with cook top, dryer. Any prospective customer who intends to use fewer natural gas appliances will be served by the city on a basis consistent with this article or as the city may decide for special cases. 
(e)  Each prospective customer must apply with the city for the service the customer desires. Each prospective customer must grant the city an easement over the property where the natural gas service will be installed, permitting the city to use this property to lay the gas line service and permitting the city ingress and egress to the property for purposes necessary for the operation thereof. Each customer shall sign a service contract and an easement, if requested by city. 
(f)  Each prospective residential service customer must make a deposit with the city as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council at the time of applying for service. Any deposit made by a customer shall be refunded to the customer at the time service to that customer is discontinued, provided the customer has paid all amounts due the city. Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the customer's account. Any balance will be refunded to the customer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill and/or penalties, the city may proceed to collect the balance of the account in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(Code 2002, § 5-3-2; Ord. No. 001-012-2008, § 3(5-3-2), 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 001-010-2010, § 3(5-3-2), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 38-404. - Rates; billing. 
(a)  Rates for residential service customers and commercial service customers shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and council. A current schedule of rates shall be kept on file in the offices of the city clerk and the city gas superintendent. 
(b)  Each individual industrial firm service customer and each individual interruptible service customer shall be sold natural gas on a contract separately negotiated between the city and the customer. Each individual industrial transportation customer shall be supplied natural gas on a contract separately negotiated between the city and the customer. In the absence of a valid executed contract currently in effect, the industrial firm service customer, the interruptible service customer and/or the industrial transportation customer will be charged the city's applicable rate for a commercial service customer (non-residential firm service). 
(c)  Each customer will be classified and placed into a rate structure that is appropriate for the intended use and that will enable the customer to buy gas at the most advantageous price to the customer. 
(d)  The city's retail gas rates shall be increased or decreased pursuant to the recommendation of the city's gas supplier/marketer based on the incremental increase or decrease in the wholesale rates for natural gas charged by the city's natural gas supplier. 
(e)  The effective date of the rate increase or decrease shall be the first billing cycle subsequent to the effective date of the change by the gas supplier. 
(f)  The application of this purchased gas adjustment (PGA) shall be to the nearest whole cent per MCF (thousand cubic feet). 
(g)  All of the city's natural gas rates shall be subject to this adjustment with the exception of the rates for service to customers whose rates already contain a purchased gas adjustment (PGA) by contract. 
(h)  Any customer who desires to have his service temporarily disconnected will be charged no fee for turning natural gas off, but a reconnection fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council will be charged for turning the natural gas back on. This standard applies under all conditions except where a new natural gas line is installed and a customer is being served natural gas for the first time. 
(i)  Meters shall be read and bills to customers for natural gas service shall be mailed out on the last day of the month in which service was provided and the amount due as shown by said bill shall be payable by the 15th day of the following month, and if not paid by the 15th day of the following month a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto and collected. If the amount of the bill, including the penalty, is not then paid by the 25th day of the following month, the natural gas service shall, without any further grace period, be disconnected, provided natural gas service shall not be terminated until the customer is issued a written notice and has an opportunity to be heard concerning the delinquent account. If the customer's bill is not paid when due and service is disconnected, no charge shall be made for such disconnection, and the deposit so made shall be used and applied against the amount owed by the customer and the balance of the deposit, if any, shall be returned to the customer. The full amount of any deposit held by the city will be returned to the customer only in the event natural gas service is disconnected and the customer's bill has been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter wish to be reconnected to the gas system the deposit hereinabove provided for will be required before reconnection and in addition a reconnection charge as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council shall be collected. 
(Code 2002, § 5-3-3; Ord. No. 02-002-2003, § 3, 2-20-2003; Ord. No. 001-012-2008, § 3(5-3-3), 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 001-010-2010, § 3(5-3-3), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 38-405. - Gas appliances. 
All natural gas appliances hereafter installed shall be design-certified by the American Gas Association or another nationally recognized laboratory that tests on the basis of American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards. All natural gas appliances shall be installed in compliance with state minimum codes and local building codes. Used natural gas appliances may be re-installed if, in the opinion of the building inspector and gas superintendent, they are in proper working condition and they pose no risk of danger or hazard. 
(Code 2002, § 5-3-4; Ord. No. 001-012-2008, § 3(5-3-4), 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 001-010-2010, § 3(5-3-4), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 38-406. - Service lines and services. 
(a)  Natural gas meters shall be located in a readily accessible place and in a place where possible damage to the meter is minimized. No regulator or meter shall be located in a closed, unventilated place. Meters shall be installed in such a manner that they are easily available for reading and servicing by city personnel. 
(b)  All service lines shall be installed in such a manner that they will drain from the meter to the main, if possible. The minimum cover on the service line shall be nine inches. 
(c)  All services installed shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications of the City of Wrens Operations and Maintenance Procedures Manual or other applicable regulations. 
(d)  Any customer receiving natural gas service will be required to pay such charge as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council for the installation of a high pressure regulator set. From the downstream connection of the high pressure regulator set, the customer will receive the same service as the customer served from the city distribution system. If more than one customer is served by a single high pressure regulator set, the cost of the regulator set may be prorated among the customers being served by it. 
(Code 2002, § 5-3-5; Ord. No. 001-012-2008, § 3(5-3-5), 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 001-010-2010, § 3(5-3-5), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 38-407. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial service customers (non-residential firm service). This classification is available to commercial and small industrial customers who are primarily engaged in the sale and/or manufacture of goods or services. Typical customers under this service classification include restaurants, small manufacturers, schools, institutions, governmental agencies or other service businesses. Customers under this service classification are those whose maximum monthly consumption of natural gas (or estimated maximum monthly consumption in the case of a new customer) during any one 12-month period preceding the last billing date is less than 6,500 MCF. Gas service under this classification is firm and is to be delivered to a customer and shall not be resold or shared with others. This service is not for standby, emergency back-up, or supplemental service. 
Firm service. Natural gas service on a firm basis means that the natural gas service is not subject to a prior claim by another customer or another class of service and receives the same priority as any other class of firm service. 
Industrial firm service customers. This classification is available to industrial customers who are engaged in the manufacture of products or goods and require monthly volumes of natural gas in excess of 6,500 MCF (or estimated consumption in the case of a new customer) during any one 12-month period preceding the last billing. Customers under this service classification will be served under special contract with the city. In the absence of a contract, the provisions of section 38-404(b) shall apply. 
Industrial transportation customers. This classification is available to industrial customers using monthly volumes of natural gas in excess of 75,000 MCF (or estimated consumption in the case of a new customer) from any gas supplier during any one 12-month period preceding the last billing. Under this service classification, customers may elect to receive natural gas supply from a third party supplier in the event the city is unable to provide natural gas quantities sufficient to meet the customer's firm and/or interruptible natural gas requirements at the first of the month (FOM) index price as defined by "Inside FERC's Gas Market Report." The city will charge customers a transportation fee for the use of the city's natural gas system for natural gas volumes provided by a third party to customers. Customers under this service classification will be served under special contract with the city. In the absence of a contract, the provisions of section 38-404(b) shall apply. 
Interruptible service. Natural gas service on an interruptible basis means that the capacity used to provide the natural gas service is subject to a prior claim by another customer or another class of service and receives a lower priority than such other classes of service. 
Interruptible service customers. This classification is available to commercial or industrial customers using monthly volumes of natural gas in excess of 7,500 MCF (or estimated consumption in the case of a new customer) during any one 12-month period preceding the last billing. Natural gas service delivered under this service classification shall be entirely interruptible upon two hours' notice by the city or the city's agent. Customers under this service classification will be served under special contract with the city. In the absence of a contract, the provisions of section 38-404(b) shall apply. 
Residential service customers. This classification is available for those residential customers who own or rent a home, condominium, manufactured home, mobile home or apartment and use natural gas for domestic purposes on a yearround basis. Customers under this service classification typically use natural gas for space heating, air conditioning, cooking, water heating or other domestic uses. 
(Ord. No. 01-002-2003, § 3(5-3-7), 2-20-2003; Ord. No. 001-012-2008, § 3(5-3-6), 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 001-010-2010, § 3(5-3-6), 10-26-2010) 
Secs. 38-408—38-427. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNDERGROUND FACILITIES 

Sec. 38-428. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the "Underground Utility Damage Prevention Ordinance." 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-1) 
Sec. 38-429. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage includes the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment, or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock, or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including augering, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power, including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
Operator means any person who owns or operates a utility. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity organized under the laws of any state; any subdivision or instrumentality of a state; and any employee, agent, or legal representative thereof. 
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting, or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum products, petroleum, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewage. 
Working day means every day, except Saturday, Sunday, and national and state holidays. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-2) 
Sec. 38-430. - Excavation and demolition permits; liability. 
A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-3) 
Sec. 38-431. - Compliance to article. 
Except as provided in section 38-436, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, private easement of an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in this article the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-4) 
Sec. 38-432. - Filing requirements of utility operators. 
(a)  Each operator having underground utilities in the city shall file with the city clerk a list containing the name of every section within the city in which it has underground utilities (including those utilities that have been abandoned in place by the operator but not yet physically removed), the name of the operator and the name, title, address and telephone number of its representative designated to receive the written or telephonic notice of intent required by section 38-433. 
(b)  Changes in any of the information contained in the list filed under this section shall be filed by the operator with the city clerk within five working days of the change. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-5) 
Sec. 38-433. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 38-436, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in this article, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three, but not more than ten, full working days: 
(1)  On each operator which has filed a list required by section 38-432 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition; or 
(2)  If the proposed area of excavation or demolition is served by an association provided for in section 38-434, on such association and on each operator which has filed a list required by section 38-432 indicating that it has underground utilities in the proposed area of excavation or demolition that is not receiving the services of the association; provided, where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) of this section must contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration, and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators and associations notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-6) 
Sec. 38-434. - Operator associations. 
Operators may form and operate an association providing for mutual receipt of section 38-433 notifications of excavation or demolition operations in a defined geographical area. An association that provides such service on behalf of operators having underground utilities within the city shall file with the city clerk the telephone number and address of the association, a description of the geographical area served by the association, and a list of the names and addresses of each operator receiving such service from the association. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-7) 
Sec. 38-435. - Response to notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Each operator or designated representative (including an association established in accordance with section 38-434) notified in accordance with section 38-433 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities, including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the approximate location of underground utilities is defined as a strip of land at least three feet wide but not wider than the width of the utility plus 1½ feet on either side of the utility. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-8) 
Sec. 38-436. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
Compliance with the notice of requirements of section 38-433 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health, or property; provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area (or to an association provided for in section 38-434, that serves an operator) where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health, or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health, or property will result before the procedures under sections 38-433 and 38-435 can be fully complied with. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-9) 
Sec. 38-437. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 38-433, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in this article shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility; and 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-10) 
Sec. 38-438. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in this article that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in this article that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic, or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments of the city, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire department personnel. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-11) 
Sec. 38-439. - Civil penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 for each such violation. Actions to recover the penalty provided for in this section shall be brought by the city attorney, at the request of any person in the city in the jurisdiction in which the cause, or some part thereof, arose or in which the offender has its principal place of business or resides. All penalties recovered in any such actions shall be paid into the general fund of the city. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property damage, including underground utilities damage, except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 5-4-12) 
Chapter 40 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; planning, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 40-1. - Unified Development Ordinance incorporated by reference. 
The Unified Development Ordinance of the city, adopted by ordinance of the mayor and council on December 20, 2007, as now or hereafter amended, is hereby incorporated into this Code by reference as fully as if set out at length herein. Copies of the zoning regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 2002, § 6-6-1) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2002 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2002 Code, as updated through November 3, 2015, which are included herein. Sections of the 2002 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 2002 Code, as updated through April 9, 2002, which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia State Law. 

 