UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE WRENS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS  of  WRENS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
William L. Hadden 
Mayor 
____________ 
Johnny Rabun, Mayor Pro-Tem 
Wayne Favors 
Edward Rabun 
Stephanie Hannah 
Michelle Weatherford-Usry 
City Council 
____________ 
Arty Thrift 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Chris Dube 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Janee Miller 
City Clerk 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1.1 - Authority. 
An Ordinance pursuant to the authority granted by the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV, as amended. 
1.2 - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all land, building and structures within the incorporated area of the City of Wrens, Georgia (the "City"). 
1.3 - Short title. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WRENS, GEORGIA, AS FOLLOWS: 
That all zoning provisions and maps and subdivision regulations previously adopted by the City of Wrens, Georgia are repealed; and 
This Ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "City of Wrens Unified Development Ordinance." 
1.4 - Purposes. 
The promotion of the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare requires the harmonious, orderly and progressive use and development of land within the City of Wrens, Georgia. In furtherance of this general intent, the regulation of land use and development by the City of Wrens, Georgia is adopted for the following purposes: 
(a)  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
(b)  To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(c)  To promote the health and the general welfare; 
(d)  To provide adequate light and air; 
(e)  To prevent overcrowding of land; 
(f)  To assure the timely provision of required streets, utilities, other facilities and services to new land development; 
(g)  To encourage land development in an orderly, serviceable, and equitable manner; 
(h)  To protect property against blight and depreciation; 
(i)  To encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures; and 
(j)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in and through land developments. 
1.5 - Standards governing the exercise of zoning power. 
The exercise of the zoning power of the City shall constitute an effort to balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right of property owners to the unrestricted use of their property. The following factors shall be considered by the Commission when reviewing and making its written recommendation and by the City Council when making a decision whether to approve or deny a requested amendment. These factors are determined to be relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of the property: 
(a)  Whether the proposed zoning would allow a use that is generally suitable for the property compared to other possible uses and the uses and zoning of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(b)  Whether the proposed zoning would adversely affect the economic value or the uses of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(c)  Whether the property to be affected by the proposed zoning can be used as currently zoned; 
(d)  Whether the proposed zoning, if adopted, would result in a use which would or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, schools, sewers, water resources, police and fire protection or other utilities; 
(e)  Whether there are other conditions or transitional patterns affecting the use and development of the property sought to be rezoned, if applicable, which give ground for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment; 
(f)  Whether the proposed zoning is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan insofar as the plan is current in its application to the specific property that is the subject of the zoning decision; 
(g)  Whether the proposed zoning or use will adversely affect a known archaeological, historical, cultural or environmental resource, such as water or air quality, ground water recharge areas, drainage areas, soil erosion and sedimentation and flooding; 
(h)  Whether the proposed zoning improves the overall zoning scheme and helps carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
1.6 - Required disclosure by government officials, applicants and their attorneys. 
The 1986 Georgia Conflict of Interest Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1, et seq.) requires disclosure of financial interests by all government officials, including the Mayor and City Council members and Planning and Zoning Commission members, who will consider a rezoning action. It also requires disclosure of campaign contributions or gifts by the rezoning applicant or his/her attorney. 
(a)  All government officials, including City Council members and Planning and Zoning Commission members, are required to disclose in writing any ownership interest they have or any family members have, in real property made the subject of a rezoning request. Additionally, these officials are required to disclose in writing any financial interest of ten percent or more in any business entity which has an ownership interest in the property to be considered. 
(b)  An applicant for a rezoning and his/her attorney must disclose all campaign contributions or gifts aggregating $250.00 or more which were made within two years of the filing of the application for rezoning. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
The following words shall have the following meaning for the purpose of this Ordinance: 
2.1.1 Acceleration lane: An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the City's Engineer, that permits vehicles to speed up and enter the main vehicle stream. 
2.1.2 Accessory building: A subordinate building or structure on the same lot as the main building and devoted exclusively to an accessory use. (See also: Building, Accessory Residential and Building, Accessory Commercial). 
2.1.3 Accessory building, portable: An accessory building temporarily located on a site of construction or located on a residential lot. 
2.1.4 Accessory building, stationary: A fixed accessory building placed on the side or rear yard after completion of the principle building on the lot. 
2.1.5 Accessory use: A use that is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or building(s) and that is located upon the same lot therewith. Residential accessory use shall not involve the conduct of business. 
2.1.6 Adult entertainment: Performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are characterized by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
2.1.7 Adult entertainment establishment: Adult entertainment establishments include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Adult bookstore: A business or establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in books, magazines, periodicals, novelty items, sex toys, or accessories which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or having five percent or more of its net sales consisting of material or items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(b)  Adult business: Either (1) any business or establishment which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage either by law or by the operators of such business or establishment; or (2) any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (3) any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(c)  Adult dancing establishment: A business or establishment that features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(d)  Adult motion picture theater: A business or establishment that is used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein, including a business or establishment wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(e)  Adult video store: A business or establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in DVDs, video tapes, movies or other reproductions, for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or rental of such material, or having five percent or more of its net sales consisting of reproduced materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(f)  Bath house or massage parlor: A business or establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(g)  Erotic entertainment/dance establishment: A business or establishment including, but not limited to, a nightclub, bar, restaurant, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(h)  Lingerie modeling studio: A business or establishment whose primary business activity consists of live performers exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(i)  Encounter center or rap establishment: A business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
2.1.8 Agriculture: Improvements and activities associated with the raising and harvesting of crops and/or livestock. "Agriculture" includes ancillary activities, including equipment storage and repair, packing, treating or storing produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities. Exception: the raising of hogs, pigs or other livestock fed from garbage or nonmuscular animal parts, or other agricultural uses that produce noxious odors are excluded from this definition. 
2.1.9 Alley: A strip of land dedicated to public use providing vehicular and pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a public road or street. 
2.1.10 Amendment: Any repeal, modification or addition to a regulation; a new regulation; any change in the numbers, shape, boundary or area of a district or any repeal or abolition of any map, part thereof, or addition thereto. 
2.1.11 Antenna: Any system of wires, poles, towers, rods, discs, dishes, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves attached to the exterior of a building or mounted in the ground independent (freestanding) of a building on a tower or pole. 
2.1.12 Apartment: A room or suite of one or more rooms with a private bathroom which is designed or intended for occupancy by, or which is occupied by, one family doing its own cooking therein, or by one person doing his/her own cooking therein. 
2.1.13 Apartment house: Any building or portion thereof which contains three or more apartments, the occupants of any two or more of which use any entrance or hall in common and all living units of which are intended to be maintained under single ownership. 
2.1.14 Applicant, development: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his/her representative who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. 
2.1.15 Appurtenance: In general, appurtenances include without limitation appendages to the original structure such as: additions, mechanical systems, covered walkways, satellite dishes and antennae, attached storage buildings, attached parking decks, etc. In site planning, the term appurtenance may be applied to access roads and parking areas as well. 
2.1.16 Arterial: A class of roads serving major traffic movements (high-speed, high volume) for travel between major points. 
2.1.17 Automobile sales or storage yard : An open premises used for the storage of or sale of complete and operable automobiles. 
2.1.18 Automobile service station: A building, lot or both in or upon which minor and emergency repair services may be rendered along with gasoline sales. Services are not to include major mechanical and/or body work. 
2.1.19 Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also known as the 100-year flood. 
2.1.20 Basement: A room or story partly underground, and having at least one-half of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story if used for dwelling or business purposes. 
2.1.21 Billboard: Any display indicating the business transacted, services rendered, goods sold or produced, name of business, person, firm or corporation which is not available or located on the same premises as the display. 
2.1.22 Block: An area of land that is entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well defined and fixed boundaries. (See Figure 2.1.A.) 
Figure 2.1.A Block 
2.1.23 Boarding house: A residential use consisting of at least one dwelling unit together with more than two rooms that are rented or are designed or intended to be rented but which rooms, individually or collectively, do not constitute separate dwelling units. A rooming house or boarding house is distinguished from a Bed and Breakfast in that the former is designed to be occupied by longer term residents (at least month-to-month tenants) as opposed to overnight or weekly guests. 
2.1.24 Bond: Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Governing Body. All bonds shall be approved by the City of Wrens wherever a bond is required by these regulations. 
2.1.25 Buffer: Landscaped, fenced or walled area which forms a linear stretch abutting a property line, pavement or structure. 
2.1.26 Buildable area: That portion of any lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with the regulations governing the given zoning district within which the particular lot is located, once the various front, side and rear building line setbacks required for the land use have been subtracted from the total area. 
2.1.27 Building: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property. When separated without connections, each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate building. 
2.1.28 Building, accessory commercial: In the nonresidential districts, a subordinate building to the main building that does not exceed the height of the main building and does not exceed 50 percent of the heated ground floor area of the main building, and that is used for purposes accessory and incidental to the main use. (See: Accessory Use). 
2.1.29 Building, accessory residential: In a residential district, a subordinate building that is attached or detached to the main structure or building and is used for a purpose that is customarily incidental to the main structure but not involving the conduct of a business. The total square footage of all accessory buildings must be less than 50 percent of the heated ground floor area of the main structure. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following: a private garage for automobile storage, tool shed, greenhouse as a hobby (no business), home workshop, children's playhouse, guesthouse, storage building, garden shelter, etc. (See: Accessory Use; Guesthouse). 
Figure 2.1.B Building Height 
2.1.30 Building Department: The Building Department of Jefferson County, Georgia. A sub-department of the Tax Assessors Office of Jefferson County, Georgia. 
2.1.31 Building height: The vertical distance measured from the level of the established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building, to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof. In case of a through lot or double frontage lot as defined in section 2.1.123, the established grade of such abutting street shall govern to one half the depth of the lot. (See Figures 2.1.B and 2.1.C.) 
Figure 2.1.C Roof Types 
2.1.32 Building Inspector: The office or person duly appointed or authorized by City Council to inspect buildings and structures in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance or any other City ordinance or regulation. 
2.1.33 Building line: A line, other than a lot line, used to regulate the location of a building or structure in relation to the abutting street or streets. (See Figure 2.1.G.) 
2.1.34 Building line, front: A line, other than a lot line, used to regulate the location of a building or structure in relation to the abutting street or streets on the front of a lot. (See Figure 2.1.G.) 
2.1.35 Building line, side: A line, other than a lot line, used to regulate the location of a building or structure in relation to the abutting street or streets on the side of a lot. (See Figure 2.1.G.) 
2.1.36 Building line, rear: A line, other than a lot line, used to regulate the location of a building or structure in relation to the abutting street or streets on the rear of a lot. (See Figure 2.1.G.) 
2.1.37 Building line setback: The distance between the building line and the right-of-way in a district, lot, tract or parcel of land. (See Figure 2.1.G.) 
2.1.38 Building site: The ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
2.1.39 Cellar: A portion of a building having one-half or more of its height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
2.1.40 Certificate of occupancy (C.O.): Official certification of a building's compliance with building regulations. When the occupancy type of a building is changed or when an addition or new building is completed, a Certificate of Occupancy must be obtained before the structure can legally be occupied. 
2.1.41 Child care facility, commercial: A building or structure operated by any person or company where care and supervision of children is provided for a fee to more than 12 children, including children of the adult provider. 
2.1.42 City: The City of Wrens, Georgia. 
2.1.43 City Attorney: The attorney contracted by the City to perform legal duties. 
2.1.44 City Clerk: The individual appointed by Mayor and City Council to perform the duties of the City Clerk. 
2.1.45 City Council: The Mayor and City Council of the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
2.1.46 City's Engineer: The licensed engineer or engineering firm contracted by the City to perform engineering duties. 
2.1.47 Club, church or fraternal organization: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, civic, educational, religious or recreational purpose, but not operated primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily a business. 
2.1.48 Commercial group development: A development consisting of one or more lots developed as a cohesive project and designed with a blend of various compatible commercial uses. The uses may be located in the same building or in separate buildings. 
2.1.49 Commercial use: Any use involving in part or in whole, the storage of merchandise, sale of merchandise, materials or services, but not including Home Occupations, as defined in 2.1.98. 
2.1.50 Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
2.1.51 Common line: A property line shared between two parcels or tracts of property. 
2.1.52 Comprehensive Plan: Any plan adopted by the City Council of the City of Wrens, or a portion of such plan or plans. This definition shall be construed liberally to include a major thoroughfare plan, master parks and recreation plan, or any other study, document, or written recommendation pertaining to subjects normally within the subject matter of a Comprehensive Plan , if formally adopted by the City. 
2.1.53 Conditional use: A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use in a specific location will comply with all of the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as specified in this Ordinance and as authorized by the City Council. 
2.1.54 Condominium: A common-interest community in which portions of the real estate are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of the real estate is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. A common-interest community is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the units' owners. 
2.1.55 Conservation areas, primary: Any property qualifying as conservation use property under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4; and any steep mountain slopes, floodplains, wetlands, waterbodies, upland buffers around wetlands and waterbodies, critical wildlife habitat, and sites of historic, cultural, or archaeological significance, located outside of building areas and lots established for building purposes. 
2.1.56 Conservation areas, secondary: Prime farmland, natural meadows, mature woodlands, farm fields, localized aquifer recharge areas, and lands containing scenic views and sites, located outside of existing buildings and lots established for building purposes. 
2.1.57 Conservation easement: A legally enforceable agreement between a property owner and the holder of the easement, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Jefferson County. A conservation easement restricts the existing and future use of the defined tract or lot to conservation use, agriculture, passive recreation, or other use approved by City Council and prohibits further subdivision or development. Such agreement may also provide for the maintenance of open spaces and any improvements on the tract or lot. Such agreement cannot be altered except with the express written permission of the easement holder. A conservation easement may also establish other provisions and contain standards that safeguard the tracts or lots special resources from negative changes. 
2.1.58 Construction plan: The maps and/or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat or plan which show the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Commission as a condition of the approval of the plat or plan. 
2.1.59 Contiguous common parcels: Parcels adjoining or touching other land at a common point and having a common owner, regardless of whether or not portions of the parcels have separate tax identification numbers, or were purchased in different land lots, or were purchased at different times. 
2.1.60 Convenience store: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet. 
2.1.61 Corridor: The area abutting the right-of-way along streets, roads, highways or interstates with the depth of that area being established by a boundary line on the zoning map. The area generally consists of the viewshed, meaning that area visible from the road. 
2.1.62 Corridor Design Overlay District: A gateway or entrance corridor to the City where additional design criteria is required to protect and improve the character of the district while directing future development in harmony with the unique status of the City of Wrens. 
2.1.63 Cul-de-sac: A street that terminates in a vehicular turn around at the termination of a street or alley. 
2.1.64 Cul-de-sac, temporary: A nonpermanent vehicular turn around located at the termination of a street or alley. 
2.1.65 Day care center: A facility in which supervision and/or treatment is regularly provided for compensation to five or more adult persons not related to the proprietor. 
2.1.66 Deceleration lane: An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the City's Engineer, which permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
2.1.67 Dedication plat: A plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
2.1.68 Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
2.1.69 Developer: A person or entity responsible for any undertaking that requires a Building Permit, Conditional Use Permit or Sign Permit. 
2.1.70 Development: Any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
2.1.71 Dimensional nonconformity: A nonconforming situation that occurs when the height, size or minimum floor space of a structure or the relationship between an existing building or buildings and other buildings or lot lines does not conform to the regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located. 
2.1.72 Display area, sign: The area of the smallest horizontally or vertically oriented rectangle which could enclose all the display area of a sign, together with any backing different in color or material from the finished material of the building face without deduction for open space or other irregularities. Structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included unless internally or decoratively lighted. Only one side of flat back-to-back signs need be included in calculating sign display area. 
2.1.73 District, zoning: 
(a)  Residential Zoning Districts: (See pages 47-51) 
R-1    Single-Family Residential (low density, ½ acre minimum lot area) 
R-1A  Single-Family Residential (high density, ⅓ acre minimum lot area) 
R-1B  Single-Family Residential (high density, ¼ acre minimum lot area) 
R-2   Multi-Family Residential 
R-3   Manufactured Housing Residential 
(b)  Nonresidential Zoning Districts: 
C    General Commercial (See pages 52-54) 
I-1   Light Industrial (See pages 57-59) 
I-2   Heavy Industrial (See pages 59-61) 
A-1A  Commercial District-Adult Oriented (See pages 54-55) 
2.1.74 Dripline: The periphery of the area beneath a tree that would be encompassed by perpendicular lines dropped from the furthermost edges of the crown of the tree. 
2.1.75 Driveway: A privately-owned vehicular passageway having at least one end thereof connected to a public street, and providing ingress to and/or egress from a lot. 
2.1.76 Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes. 
2.1.77 Dwelling, single-family: A structure containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use, which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum width in excess of 16 feet; 
(b)  Minimum square footage required by the zoning district in which located; 
(c)  The roof shall have a minimum 2:12 (two inches of rise for every 12 inches of run) roof pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built-up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the Building Inspector; 
(d)  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or vinyl or other materials of like appearance; 
(e)  The dwelling is attached to a permanent foundation. 
2.1.78 Dwelling, two-family: A building containing not more than two dwelling units, and designed or used to house not more than two families, living independently of each other, and each having its own kitchen and bath, each of which may include no more than two lodgers or boarders. 
2.1.79 Dwelling, multi-family: A building designed for, or portion of a building having accommodations for three or more families living independently of each other, and each having its own kitchen and bath facilities. This term includes dwellings occupied more or less permanently for residential purposes in which the rooms are occupied in apartments, suites or groups such as apartment units, flats, bachelor apartments, studio apartments, kitchenette apartments, townhouses and other buildings similarly occupied. 
2.1.80 Dwelling unit: A structure or a portion of any structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with bathroom and cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels, motels, boarding houses or similar uses. 
2.1.81 Easement: A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. (See Figure 2.1.D.) 
Figure 2.1.D Easements 
2.1.82 Escrow account: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face value, as specified by the City's Engineer, to cover the costs of required improvements. 
2.1.83 Exterior architectural feature: The architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to, the texture of the building material, the type and style of all windows, doors, and signs, and other related architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements. 
2.1.84 Family: One or more persons having a common domestic bond who live together in one dwelling unit as a traditional family or its functional equivalent, headed by one or more resident persons who have authority over the care, functioning or management of their common household. The definition of a "Family" does not include: 
(a)  Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, coterie, or like organization; 
(b)  Any group of individuals whose association is temporary or seasonal in nature; or 
(c)  Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result of criminal offenses. 
2.1.85 Fenestration: The spatial definition of the walls of a building. The facade of a building establishes a wall surface or plane. The degree to which that plane is visually segmented by bays and punctured by entrances and windows is fenestration. For example, historic buildings have a high degree of fenestration and large, modern "big-box" stores have an extremely low degree of fenestration. The City's architectural history is one of moderate to high fenestration. 
2.1.86 Final plat: The final drawing of a subdivision and, as applicable, dedication, prepared for filing for record with the Clerk of the Jefferson County Superior Court, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this Ordinance. 
2.1.87 Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to be inundated by water from the Base Flood. As used in this Ordinance, the term refers to that area designated as subject to flooding from the Base Flood (100-year flood) on the "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. (See: Base Flood). 
2.1.88 Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. As used in this Ordinance, the term refers to that area designated as a floodway on the "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. (See: Base Flood). 
2.1.89 Gateway: Distinct corners, formed by the intersections of major streets, arteries, and highways, which mark the established edge of the community and distinguish the route entering the heart of the community. 
2.1.90 Garage: A building used for the storage or housing of motor vehicles. 
2.1.91 Garage, private: A garage intended for an owner or used by the members of families resident upon the premises. No rental of private garage space is permitted. 
2.1.92 Grade: The slope of a road, street, or other public way, specific in percentage terms from the horizontal. 
2.1.93 Gross floor area: The total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage. 
2.1.94 Guest house: An accessory building to be used solely by the occupant of the main building for his/her pleasure or recreation or to house non-paying guests or tenants as a temporary residence. Guest Houses shall meet the same square footage requirement as Accessory Buildings: the total square footage of the guesthouse and all accessory buildings must be less than 50 percent of the heated ground floor area of the main structure. (See also: Building, Accessory Residential, Section 2.1.29). 
2.1.95 Habitat for endangered or threatened species: An area verified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as: (a) actually containing naturally-occurring individuals of a species that has been listed as endangered or threatened under the Federal Endangered Species Act, as amended; and (b) being likely to support the continued existence of that species by providing for a significant portion of that species' biological requirements, and that meets the definition of "Natural Conditions" as defined by this Ordinance. 
2.1.96 Habitable floor: Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreation, or any combination thereof. A floor having the limited purpose of storage is not a habitable floor. 
2.1.97 Health Department: The Health Department of Jefferson County, Georgia. 
2.1.98 Home occupation: Any occupation or profession engaged in by any occupant of a dwelling not to include the operation of a retail business, a manufacturing business or a repair business of any kind on the premises. Home Occupation shall not include any occupation conducted in any building on the premises other than the building which is used by the occupant as his/her private dwelling. Home occupation shall include, in general, personal services such as those furnished by a musician, internet business, artist, barber, hairstylist, beautician or seamstress when performed by the person occupying the building as his/her private dwelling. Home occupation shall not include occupations that involve the use of chemicals, matter or energy that may create or cause to be created noises, noxious odors or hazards that will endanger the health, safety and welfare of the community. (See also: Section 22.1). 
2.1.99 Homeowners association: An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess fees to each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
2.1.100 Hospital: An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities. 
2.1.101 Hospital, animal: A place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is incidental to the hospital use. All facilities associated with an Animal Hospital shall be located indoors. 
2.1.102 Hotel: Any building which contains multiple sleeping rooms for the more or less temporary occupancy of individuals who are lodged with or without meals. 
2.1.103 HUD: The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
2.1.104 Individual sewage disposal system: A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device. 
2.1.105 Industrialized building: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the Industrialized Buildings Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110, et seq. (See also: Modular Building). 
2.1.106 Interior landscaping: Landscaping areas within or partially within pavement areas for breaking up large expanses of pavement. Interior landscape areas include islands, peninsulas, or combinations thereof. 
2.1.107 Island: An interior landscaping area surrounded by pavement or structures. 
2.1.108 Junk yard: The use of more than 200 square feet of the area of any lot for outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof. (See also: Section 7.3.5). 
2.1.109 Kennel: An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs, cats, or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of animals is conducted as a business. 
2.1.110 Land suitability analysis: A method used by land planners, in preparing land use plans at a community-wide scale or land plans at a site development scale, to evaluate the fitness of land for various uses based at least partially on environmental criteria. The end product of land suitability analysis is typically a map or set of maps depicting the appropriateness of land areas for various land uses. 
2.1.111 Land use permit: A permit issued to authorize the use of land or development of land for a specific purpose. 
2.1.112 Landscape, frontage: Landscape areas between the front of the principal building(s) and adjacent street(s). 
2.1.113 Landscape, perimeter: Landscape areas located between the side(s) and rear of the primary building(s) and adjacent property line(s). 
2.1.114 Landscaping: Landscaping shall consist of any of the following or combination thereof: material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, flowers, vines, hedges, trees, native plant materials, planters, brick, stone or natural forms, water forms, aggregate or other landscape features, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt. The use of brick, stone, aggregate or other inorganic materials should not predominate over the use of organic plant material. 
2.1.115 Lane: A public thoroughfare which ordinarily affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and which is not more than 25 feet wide. 
2.1.116 Letter of credit: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the City. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
2.1.117 Living quarters: Any habitable area used for lodging. 
2.1.118 Loading area: A parking area other than a public street used for the purpose of loading or unloading material, merchandise, or persons. 
2.1.119 Lot: A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description (such as on a subdivision plat or a survey map or plat) or described by metes and bounds, and intended for use, transfer of ownership, or for building development. The word "lot" shall not include any portion of a right-of-way. (See Figure 2.1.E.) 
Figure 2.1.E Types of Lots 
2.1.120 Lot area: The total area included within the front, side and rear lot lines. (See Figure 2.1.F.) 
Figure 2.1.F Lot Definitions. 
2.1.121 Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. (See Figure 2.1.E.) 
2.1.122 Lot, depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. (See Figure 2.1.F and 2.1.H) 
2.1.123 Lot, double frontage: A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. (See Figure 2.1.E.) 
2.1.124 Lot, flag: Flag Lots are prohibited by this Ordinance. A flag lot is a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. (See Figure 2.1.E.) 
2.1.125 Lot frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street. (See Figure 2.1.F.) 
2.1.126 Lot improvement: Any building, structure, place, work of art, sign, or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
2.1.127 Lot, interior: A lot which is not a corner lot. (See Figure 2.1 .E.) 
2.1.128 Lot line, front: The front lot line of an interior lot separating the lot from the fronting street right-of-way. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line upon which the principal building entrance will front. (See Figure 2.1 .G.) 
2.1.129 Lot line, rear: The rear lot line boundary opposite and more or less parallel to the front lot line. The rear lot line of an irregular or triangular lot shall be for the purpose of this Ordinance a line not less than ten feet long, lying wholly within the lot, and parallel to the farthest distance from the front lot line. (See Figure 2.1.G.) 
2.1.130 Lot line, side: A side lot boundary line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street line is an exterior side lot line. Any other side lot line is an interior side lot line. (See Figure 2.1.G.) 
Figure 2.1.G Lot Lines 
2.1.131 Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision approved in accordance with the land subdivision requirements of this Ordinance or a lot described on a plat, deed or survey which has been lawfully recorded in the property records of the Clerk of the Jefferson County Superior Court. 
2.1.132 Lot, through: (See: Lot Double Frontage). 
2.1.133 Lot width: The shortest distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required front building line, or in the absence of a front building line, the distance between side lot lines measured at the front line of the building located or intended to be located on the lot. (See Figures 2.1.F and 2.1.H.) 
Figure 2.1.H Lot Width and Depth 
2.1.134 Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of a "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. §5401-5426). 
2.1.135 Manufactured home community: A contiguous parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of three or more Manufactured Homes for residential occupancy in accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance. The owner must obtain an Occupation Tax Certificate from the City of Wrens prior to operating a Manufactured Home Community. 
2.1.136 Manufactured home site: A lot, as prescribed by Article 15, Section 15.5(b) of this Ordinance which shall be clearly indicated by corner markers on which may be placed a Manufactured Home. 
2.1.137 Marquee: A permanent structure attached to and supported by a building which projects over public or private property. 
2.1.138 Material change in appearance: The construction of a new structure, or a change that will affect the exterior architectural features of any structure, site, or work of art. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a structure that does not involve a change in design is not a "material change in appearance." Material change in appearance includes without limitation any one or more of the following: 
(a)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a structure, including without limitation relocation of any doors or windows, or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; 
(b)  Demolition of a structure; 
(c)  Commencement of excavation; 
(d)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public way on the property; or 
(e)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any structure, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other related features. 
2.1.139 Mayor: The Mayor of the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
2.1.140 Mobile office unit: A transportable, factory-assembled unit designed as temporary office facilities for construction projects or temporary offices associated with commercial, industrial, business or institutional activities. 
2.1.141 Modular building: A structure constructed in a factory of factory assembled parts, transported to the building site in whole or in units and later attached to a permanent foundation. The completed structure is not a mobile home or a Manufactured Home. (See also: Industrialized Building). 
2.1.142 Motel: Any building containing multiple sleeping rooms for more or less temporary occupancy of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and where the design favors a direct vehicular approach to each sleeping or living room. Any building or structure used primarily as temporary lodging and exceeding two stories in height shall be classified as a Hotel rather than a Motel. 
2.1.143 Mural: A pictorial representation not specifically identifying goods or services offered by the business on the premises. 
2.1.144 Natural conditions: The flora, fauna, soil and water conditions that would develop on a specific tract of land if all human interference were to be removed. The tract of land must have been undisturbed for a sufficient period of time for natural processes to dominate the tract. This period of time will vary among environments. 
2.1.145 Natural grade: The elevation of the ground adjoining the building. 
2.1.146 Nonconforming lot: A lot existing at the effective date of this Ordinance (and not created for the purposes of evading the restrictions of this Ordinance) that does not meet the minimum area requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
2.1.147 Nonconforming situation: A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this Ordinance, any existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one or more of the regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the lot or structure is located. Among other possibilities, a non-conforming situation may arise when an existing structure exceeds the maximum height limitation, when the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback requirements) is not in conformity with this Ordinance, or when land or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by this Ordinance. Nonconforming signs shall be governed by the provisions of Section 17.13 of this Ordinance. 
2.1.148 Nonconforming use: A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
2.1.149 Nudity: The displaying of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or the displaying of any portion of a person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. 
2.1.150 Nursing care home: A facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital. 
2.1.151 Obscene: Material is obscene if: 
(a)  To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; and 
(b)  The material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value; and 
(c)  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, any of the following sexual conduct: 
(1)  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
(2)  Acts of masturbation; 
(3)  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
(4)  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
(5)  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
2.1.152 Off-premises sign: Signs directing attention to a business or service not related to the premises on which the sign is located. 
2.1.153 On-premises sign: Signs identifying or related to a business or service located on the premises where the sign is located. 
2.1.154 Open space: Any combination of Primary Conservation Areas and Secondary Conservation Areas, as defined in this Ordinance, that together form a permanent, undivided or relatively undivided, undeveloped area. As much as 25 percent of the open space may be devoted to Active Recreation facilities, as defined in this Ordinance. Easements for electric transmission lines or any other aboveground improvement shall not be considered open space. Stormwater management features, such as lakes, ponds, and waterways, may be considered open space at the discretion of the Commission, provided that such areas are designed and maintained in a manner that contributes to open space and the aesthetics of the area. 
2.1.155 Open space, public: An area within a development or subdivision designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of all residents or for the use and enjoyment of the public in general. 
2.1.156 Orientation: The direction a building's primary elevation (also known as façade) faces. 
2.1.157 Original tract: A unit of land which the owner holds under single or unified ownership, or which the owner holds controlling interest on the effective date of this Ordinance, where all land abutting said tract is separately owned by others, not related to or associated by business partnership with the owner. 
2.1.158 Ornamentation: Decorative elements applied to a structure. 
2.1.159 Outparcel: A lot within a planned center or a portion of a larger parcel that is reserved during development for sale and/or future development. In commercial developments, these lots are generally reserved along the frontage road for smaller businesses. 
2.1.160 Owner: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to land. 
2.1.161 Package treatment plant: A sewage treatment facility, usually privately operated, typically having a treatment capacity of less than one million gallons per day. In most cases, a package treatment plant is considered a temporary means of wastewater treatment until connection to a public sanitary sewerage system is available. 
2.1.162 Parking lot, accessory: A parcel of land or portion thereof used by a person, partnership, firm or corporation in any commercial or industrial zoning district exclusively for the parking of vehicles of its employees or customers and for which no charge is made. 
2.1.163 Parking lot, commercial: A lot or building or portion thereof, other than an automobile sales lot, held out or used for the storage or parking of six or more motor vehicles for consideration where service or repair facilities are not permitted. Such parking lot or garage shall not be considered an Accessory Use; nor shall it be used for the storage of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles, parts thereof or junk. 
2.1.164 Parking lot, private: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces which may include partially enclosed one-story buildings, and where a charge is made for storage or parking of motor vehicles. 
2.1.165 Parking space: Off-street space which is at least 18 feet long by nine feet wide used for the temporary location of one licensed motor vehicle having direct access to a street or alley, not including an access driveway. Every space shall be situated so that no part of any parked vehicle overhangs a public right-of-way. All parking space markings shall be laid out and restored as often as necessary to clearly delineate each parking space. Truck loading and unloading space shall not be considered a parking space. 
2.1.166 Pedestrian way: A public right-of-way or private easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used, in addition to providing pedestrian access, for the installation of utility lines. 
2.1.167 Performance bond: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the City's Engineer to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the City. The City may call in the performance bond in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
2.1.168 Permitted use: A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
2.1.169 Person: A natural human being, estate, association, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity. 
2.1.170 Personal care home: Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator of the home by blood or marriage. Personal services include, but are not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. Also known as "Assisted Living Facility". 
2.1.171 Personal property storage facility: A building or structure designed and used for the renting of space under a rental agreement that provides a renter access to rented space for the storage and retrieval of personal property. Residential use of storage units is prohibited. 
2.1.172 Personal service establishment: A business providing personal, financial, technical or repair services, assistance or advice to individual consumers. 
2.1.173 Planned unit development (PUD): A development constructed on a tract of at least ten acres, planned and developed as an integral unit under single ownership, and consisting of a combination of residential and nonresidential uses. (See also: Article 12). 
2.1.174 Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
2.1.175 Planning and Zoning Commission member: Any person appointed by City Council to serve on the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.1.176 Planting strip: The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb and the property line exclusive of the area occupied by the sidewalk. 
2.1.177 Preliminary plat: A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision. A preliminary plat is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a land subdivision. 
2.1.178 Professional engineer: An engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
2.1.179 Professional surveyor: A surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of land surveying. 
2.1.180 Protective covenants: Contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of a designated area. 
2.1.181 Public hearing body: Applicable to City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.1.182 Public improvement: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
2.1.183 Public notice: A notice published once in a newspaper of general circulation in Jefferson County, Georgia, at least 15 days and no more than 45 days prior to a public hearing. 
2.1.184 Recreation, active: Leisure activities that are facility oriented, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields. 
2.1.185 Recreation, passive: Leisure activities that are natural resource oriented, such as hiking trails, conservation areas, and nature preserves. 
2.1.186 Recreation vehicle: A vehicle type unit primarily designed for recreation or temporary camping, travel or seasonal use, which has its own motor power, or is mounted on, or towed by another vehicle and has a living area of less than 500 square feet. This includes travel trailers, folding camper trailers, truck campers and motor homes. 
2.1.187 Reservation: A method of holding land for future public use by showing proposed public areas on a subdivision plat. 
2.1.188 Reserve strip: A strip of land across the end of, or along the edge of, a street, alley, or lot for the purpose of controlling access which is reserved or held until future street extension or widening. 
2.1.189 Residence: Any structure in which one or more people legally dwell. 
2.1.190 Residential development: Any group of lots or structures used or designed primarily for residences. 
2.1.191 Right-of-way: 
(a)  Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another; or 
(b)  A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer or other similar use. 
2.1.192 Right-of-way line: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, storm or sanitary sewer main, shade trees, or for another special use and owned by a state, county or municipality. 
2.1.193 Roadway, traveled way or street surface: That portion of a road which is improved, designed, or ordinarily intended for vehicular use. Divided roads and roads with frontage or access roads have more than one roadway. On undivided roads and roads without frontage or access roads, the roadway width lies between the curb lines or between the pavement edges, whichever is appropriate. 
2.1.194 Satellite dish antenna: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or parabola. Such device is used to transmit and receive radio or electromagnetic waves between earth and/or orbitally-based equipment. This includes satellite stations, television satellite dishes, and satellite microwave antennas. 
2.1.195 Scenic views and sites: Those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the Comprehensive Plan, or by other reasonable means. 
2.1.196 Screening: Either (a) a strip of land at least ten feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least four feet high at the time of planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at least six feet high; or (b) an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet high. 
2.1.197 Sensitive natural area: Any area, as identified now or hereafter by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
(a)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(b)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(c)  Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(d)  Other areas so designated by the Department of Natural Resources; and which is sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
2.1.198 Septic tank: An approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewerage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
2.1.199 Service building: A building or structure located within a Manufactured Home Community offering a washer and dryer facility for the welfare and convenience of the residents of the Manufactured Home Community. Such Service Building shall not be made available for the use of any person not residing in the Manufactured Home Community. 
2.1.200 Setback: (See: Building Line Setback, Section 2.1.37). 
2.1.201 Shade tree: A tree in a public place, street right-of-way, or special easement, planted to provide canopy that will obscure the sun and heat from the ground. 
2.1.202 Shoulder: That portion of a roadway between the outer edge of the paved surface or the curb to the inside edge of the ditch or gutter or original ground surface. 
2.1.203 Shrubs: Self-supporting, woody species as normally grown in Jefferson County, Georgia. 
2.1.204 Sidewalk: A hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a road. 
2.1.205 Sign: Any writing, printing, lettering, painting, display, emblem, drawing or other attention-gaining device used to advertise products, goods, services or events, or to make anything known. Signs include but are not limited to murals, streamers, flags, wheels, propellers, or other artificial devices, figures, shapes, lights, exhibits, temporary banners, portable and mobile signs. 
2.1.206 Sign, box cabinet: A sign being flat in appearance with little or no dimension. Box Cabinet Signs include flat signs either internally or indirectly illuminated and with or without frame. 
2.1.207 Sign, freestanding box cabinet: Any Box Cabinet Sign unattached to a building and/or structure. Freestanding Box Cabinet Signs are prohibited by this Ordinance. 
2.1.208 Sign, wall-mounted box cabinet: Any Box Cabinet Sign attached to a wall of a building and/or permanent structure. Wall-mounted Box Cabinet Signs are permitted under this Ordinance. 
2.1.209 Sign, group: A sign advertising two or more businesses which is located on the same lot or two or more lots under the same or different ownership. 
2.1.210 Sign, marquee: Any sign attached to or hung from a marquee. 
2.1.211 Sign, nonconforming: A sign that, on the effective date of this Ordinance, does not conform to one or more of the regulations set forth in this Ordinance, particularly Article 17. 
2.1.212 Sign permit: A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator that authorizes the recipient to erect, move, enlarge or substantially alter a sign. 
2.1.213 Sign, temporary: A sign which either: 
(a)  Is not permanently attached to any structure, building, motor vehicle, or the ground; or 
(b)  Is intended for a limited display period covering a special event; or 
(c)  Is designed and constructed to be movable from one location to another. 
2.1.214 Site plan: A legible, organized and approximate drawing of a residential, multi-family residential, institutional, office, commercial, or industrial development, showing the general layout of a proposed development including among other features the location of buildings, parking areas, buffers and landscaping. The site plan is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a development. 
2.1.215 Slope: Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree; the ratio of the difference in elevation between two points on the ground, and the horizontal distance between these two points. For purposes of determining steep slopes, slopes shall be measured between two points on the ground separated by 100 feet or more. 
2.1.216 Sovereign authority: The power of a governing body to administer public policy. 
2.1.217 Spacing: The distance between buildings located on adjoining parcels (thus including Setbacks). 
2.1.218 Specified sexual activities shall mean: 
(a)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: sodomy, cunnilingus, fellatio, pedophilia, lesbianism, homosexuality; or 
(b)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(c)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(d)  Fondling of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron; or 
(e)  Sexually oriented torture; or 
(f)  Fondling or other sexual contact with an animal so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
2.1.219 Specified anatomical areas shall mean: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(b)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
2.1.220 Stable: Any building or premise where animals are kept. 
2.1.221 Steep slope: Lands with slopes of at least 35 percent, or those slopes which can be calculated with aid of a United States Geological Survey 1:24,000, 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic map or other available topographic information. 
2.1.222 Story: The space in a building between the surfaces of any floor and the floor next above or below, or roof next above, or any space not defined as a ground floor, mezzanine, balcony, penthouse or attic. 
2.1.223 Street: Land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, shall be considered part of the street. A street is constructed and open to vehicle travel as approved by official action of City Council. A street is also an existing federal, state, county or municipal roadway, constructed and open to vehicle travel. 
2.1.224 Street, collector: Unless otherwise defined by a Major Transportation Plan or Comprehensive Plan, a collector street is a public street whose function is to collect traffic from neighborhoods and local streets and which connects to another public street of equal or greater classification. A collector street also may provide direct access to adjacent properties. 
2.1.225 Street, dead end: A street with no outlet at one end. 
2.1.226 Street, industrial: A street of some continuity used primarily by all forms of commercial or industrial vehicular traffic and used for travel between commercial areas, residential areas and industrial districts or between industrial districts. 
2.1.227 Street, local: Unless otherwise defined by a Major Transportation Plan or Comprehensive Plan, any public street, except an alley, collector street, or arterial street which has a primary function to provide direct access to adjoining properties and which serves a limited area only, usually a single land subdivision. 
2.1.228 Street, major arterial: Unless otherwise defined by a Major Transportation Plan or Comprehensive Plan, a Major Arterial Street is a street connecting two or more cities or communities, connecting two highways of equal or greater capacity, or serving as the primary access to a large land area. A Major Arterial Street may also serve a large traffic generator (e.g., an industrial area) and perform a secondary function of providing local access. 
2.1.229 Street, marginal access: A residential street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through-traffic. 
2.1.230 Street, perimeter: Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be subdivided abuts one side. 
2.1.231 Street, private: A road or street that has not been accepted for maintenance by the City and that is not owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or other public entity. 
2.1.232 Street, rural: A street supplementary to the major street system which primarily serves agricultural areas or other lands not subdivided for residential use. 
2.1.233 Street, width: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
2.1.234 Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: site built buildings, industrialized buildings, manufactured homes, carports, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes and storm shelters. 
2.1.235 Subdivider: Any Person who undertakes the subdivision of land, and any Person having such a proprietary interest in land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this Ordinance, or the authorized agent of such Person. 
2.1.236 Subdivision: A division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future, including but not limited to all division of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. The word "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or parcel which is subdivided. 
2.1.237 Subdivision, major: A subdivision that involves any of the following: 
(a)  The creation of more than three lots; 
(b)  The creation of any new public streets; 
(c)  A planned development; 
(d)  The extension of a public water or sewer system; or 
(e)  The installation of drainage improvements through one or more lots to serve one or more other lots. 
2.1.238 Subdivision, minor: A subdivision that does not involve any of the following: 
(a)  The creation of more than three lots; 
(b)  The creation of any new public streets; 
(c)  A planned development; 
(d)  The extension of a public water or sewer system; or 
(e)  The installation of drainage improvements through one or more lots to serve one or more other lots. 
2.1.239 Tower: Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and other similar structures. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the tower structure. 
2.1.240 Townhouse: One of a group of three or more attached dwelling units, having ground level entry, under fee simple or cooperative ownership. 
2.1.241 Tract of land: A lot. 
2.1.242 Travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet. (See also: Recreation Vehicle). 
2.1.243 Tree: A woody or fibrous perennial plant of natural growth with one or more upright limbs. 
2.1.244 Use, principal: The primary and main purpose for which a lot is utilized. 
2.1.245 Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel or gas pipelines, telephone lines, cable telephone lines, fiber optic cable, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and drainage ways, and railroads or other utilities identified by the City. As appropriate to the context, the term "utility" may also include all persons, companies, or governmental agencies supplying the same. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term "utility" does not include systems or facilities related to cellular phone service and/or Personal Communications Service (PCS). 
2.1.246 Variance: A grant of permission by the Commission that authorizes the recipient to do that which he/she could not otherwise legally do under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
2.1.247 Wetlands, jurisdictional: An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
2.1.248 Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
2.1.249 Wetland delineation: The establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the United States Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified professional. 
2.1.250 Wetlands functions: The beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including: storage, conveyance, and attenuation of floodwater and stormwater; protection of water quality and reduction of erosion; habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wildlife and fisheries; educational, historical, and archaeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic and recreational amenities. 
2.1.251 Wetland protection district: All wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Wrens and shown on the Generalized Wetland Map. 
2.1.252 Yard: A required area on a lot, above grade, unoccupied by structures except for projections and specific accessory structures permitted in such area under the provisions of this Ordinance. A yard extends from the ground upward. 
2.1.253 Zoning administrator: The person appointed by City Council to enforce zoning ordinances and perform duties related to zoning. 
2.1.254 Zoning change: An action by the City Council based upon the recommendation of the Commission causing a change in the boundary of a zoning district so as to change the zoning district designation of a property or a portion of a property, or allowing the establishment of a Conditional Use on a property. 
2.1.255 Zoning map: The Official Existing Land Use and Zoning Map of Wrens, Georgia showing the boundaries of the various zoning districts, as adopted by the City Council and located in the Conference Room at Wrens City Hall. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISMS 

3.1 - The Planning and Zoning Commission. 
There shall be a Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of nine members. For further reference, see: Title 6, Chapter 1 of the City Code of Ordinances of the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
3.1.1  Appointment and Terms of Commission Members. 
(a)  Commission members shall be appointed by the City Council. Members shall serve five year staggered terms and may continue until their successors are duly appointed. The City Council shall have the right to remove any member of the Commission for cause. 
(b)  The Commission shall annually elect one of its members as Chairman. 
3.1.2  Meetings of the Commission. 
(a)  The Commission shall establish a regular meeting schedule. It has only advisory authority, reviewing and making recommendations to the City Council on zoning and land development matters. Thus, the Commission shall conduct its meetings so as to obtain necessary information and to provide a forum for public participation. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all Commission proceedings. 
(c)  All Commission meetings shall be open to the public. Whenever feasible the agenda for each meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting. 
3.1.3  Quorum and Voting. 
(a)  A quorum for the Commission shall consist of a majority of its membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the Commission to take official action. 
(b)  All actions of the Commission shall be taken by a majority vote, a quorum being present. 
3.1.4  The Powers and Duties of the Commission. 
(a)  Specific Limitation of Powers: The Commission does not have the power to: amend any zoning ordinance or subdivision regulations; rezone any land; declare this Ordinance or any amendment thereto invalid; or allow any use not permitted by this Ordinance. 
(b)  The duties of the Commission shall include: 
(1)  Recommending to the City Council changes in the Unified Development Ordinance that the Commission believes are appropriate; 
(2)  Recommending to the City Council approval, disapproval or other action on all requests for Zoning Changes as provided in this Ordinance; 
(3)  Recommending approval or denial of a Conditional Use permit after a public hearing; 
(4)  Hearing and deciding appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order requirement, decision or refusal made by the Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator or other administrative official in the administration or enforcement of any provisions of this Ordinance; 
(5)  Approving or denying applications for Variances from the development requirements of this Ordinance; 
(6)  Approving or disapproving Preliminary Plats for land subdivisions; 
(7)  Dispensing general information about this Ordinance to the public upon request; 
(8)  Reviewing questions involving interpretation of the City's Zoning Map, including zoning district boundary lines and lot lines; 
(9)  Advising the City Council on matters of zoning and land development as it may deem appropriate; 
(10)  Conducting such other business and affairs as may be, from time to time, requested by the City Council. 
3.2 - The City Council. 
The City Council shall hear and make decisions concerning: 
(a)  Proposed changes or amendments to this Ordinance; 
(b)  Adoption of amendments to the Zoning Map or to the text of this Ordinance; 
(c)  Approval or disapproval of Conditional Use permits, as specified in Article 18; 
(d)  Approval, disapproval or other action on all requests for Zoning Changes as provided in this Ordinance; and 
(e)  Approval or disapproval of Final Plats for land subdivision. 
3.3 - Building Inspector. 
The Building Inspector shall have the power and duty to provide the following services related to this Ordinance: 
(a)  Issue and when necessary revoke building permits; 
(b)  Issue Certificates of Occupancy; 
(c)  Review and approve, disapprove or approve with modification a plat, subdivision or site plan. 
(d)  Perform all other duties as assigned by the City Council necessary to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.4 - Public hearings. 
3.4.1  Public Notice. A public notice for all public hearings shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in Jefferson County, Georgia, at least 15 days and no more than 45 days prior to a public hearing concerning proposed Zoning Changes or amendments to this Ordinance including the maps thereto, setting the time, place and purpose of said public hearing. 
3.4.2  Procedure. Public hearings shall be conducted by the Public Hearing Body and shall be governed by Section 3.4 of this Ordinance. Minutes of the meeting shall be taken by a Public Hearing Body member or his/her designee. Copies of any findings and decisions shall be available upon request to interested members of the public. The public hearing shall be called to order by the Presiding Officer, who shall summarize the requirements as to speakers' conduct and time limits. 
3.4.3  Presentation of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall report on the application, including the following: (i) the location of the property, the present use, and a description of the proposed amendment, Variance or change requested by the applicant; (ii) any report, investigation, or recommendation of the Zoning Administrator; and (iii) any additional information considered by the Zoning Administrator to be relevant. 
3.4.4  Speakers. Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the pending application and shall address his/her remarks only to the members of the Public Hearing Body. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or any discussion irrelevant to the pending application. Speakers shall not duplicate previous comments, as repetition deprives other speakers of valuable time to provide new information. The Presiding Officer or his/her designee shall refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after once being cautioned, continues to violate any of the provisions of this paragraph. 
3.4.5  Presentation by Applicant; Time Limits. The applicant or applicant's representative shall present and explain his/her application after being recognized by the Presiding Officer. The applicant will be allowed not less than ten minutes combined total to make his/her initial presentation and subsequent rebuttal, but the applicant and all supporters shall have a combined time limit of no more than 15 minutes. 
3.4.6  Public Comments. After the applicant's presentation, interested persons who support the application, after being permitted to speak by the Presiding Officer, may address the proposed application by standing and stating their name, address, and interest and any comments on the pending application. Persons other than the applicant who support the application are allowed to speak in support of the pending application, subject to the 15 minute combined total time limit. 
3.4.7  Opposition. Persons opposing an application are allowed not less than ten minutes total as a group (and in no event less than the combined time used by the applicant and other supporters), to address their opposition to the application. The opponents shall have a combined total time limit of no more than 15 minutes. It is suggested that the supporters, and opponents, each obtain one spokesperson to present their views. No individual except the applicant, a group representative, or the applicant's attorney shall speak more than one time on an application. 
3.4.8  Applicant Summary; Deliberation. The applicant shall have an opportunity for brief summary remarks using any reserved time from his/her initial presentation, after which time the Presiding Officer shall close the public hearing. The Public Hearing Body shall then deliberate and take action on the application pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. Deliberation may include questions to applicants, supporters and/or opponents. Actions of the Public Hearing Body shall be by majority vote, a quorum being present. 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND EXISTING LAND USE AND ZONING MAP 

4.1 - Classes of districts. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City is divided into the following classes of zoning districts: 
(a)  Residential Zoning Districts: 
R-1 Single-Family Residential (low density, ½ acre minimum lot area) 
R-1A Single-Family Residential (high density, ⅓ acre minimum lot area) 
R-1B Single-Family Residential (high density, ¼ acre minimum lot area) 
R-2 Multi-Family Residential 
R-3 Manufactured Housing Residential 
(b)  Nonresidential Zoning Districts: 
C General Commercial 
I-1 Light Industrial 
I-2 Heavy Industrial 
A-1A Commercial District-Adult Oriented 
4.2 - Official existing land use and zoning map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the various zoning districts shall be shown on the Official Existing Land Use and Zoning Map of Wrens, Georgia. The Official Land Use and Zoning Map is hereby made part of this Ordinance, and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be a part of this Ordinance as if set forth herein. 
(b)  The Zoning Map, as adopted by the City Council and subsequently amended from time to time by its action, shall be maintained as so revised by the City Council. The Commission shall interpret the Zoning Map and answer questions concerning Zoning District boundary lines and lot lines. 
(c)  The Zoning Map will be located in the Conference Room at Wrens City Hall. 
4.2.1  Interpretation of District Boundaries. Unless otherwise shown on the Zoning Map, the boundary lines of Zoning Districts are lot lines; the center lines of streets or alleys or such lines extended; railroad rights-of-way; the center lines of creeks and streams; or municipal corporate boundary lines as they existed at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or as they exist at the time of approval of a rezoning of land. 
4.2.2  Zoning District Boundary Changes. 
(a)  If in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, changes are made in Zoning District boundaries or other information contained within the Existing Land Use and Zoning Map, changes shall be made on the Zoning Map by the Commission, within a reasonable time following approval of the change by the City Council. 
(b)  Regardless of the existence of multiple copies of the Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the final authority as to the current zoning status of land in the City shall be the master Zoning Map, as adopted and amended by the City Council, maintained at City Hall. 
ARTICLE V. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

5.1 - General purpose. 
To establish residential zoning districts and to protect property in the districts from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. Residential uses are intended to be the primary use within each district. Certain structures and uses necessary to serve governmental, educational, religious, noncommercial, recreational, and other such needs are permitted either outright or as Conditional Uses, subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect the residential character of the districts. 
5.2 - Single-Family Residential District (Low Density) R-1. 
5.2.1  Purpose. To establish a low density, single-family residential zoning district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
5.2.2  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses - Article 8). 
(a)  Single Family Dwellings; 
(b)  Signs, subject to the provisions of Article 17; 
(c)  Satellite Dishes, subject to the provisions of Section 22.2; 
(d)  Yard Sales: provided that not more than four yard sales, each lasting no more than three days per occurrence, are conducted at a single location during a calendar year; 
(e)  Non-commercial agricultural pursuits (i.e., gardens, private greenhouses); 
(f)  The keeping of not more than two non-transient boarders or roomers by a family. 
5.2.3  Accessory Uses. 
(a)  Accessory Buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, including buildings used for maintenance, storage and horticultural purposes. See also: Section 2.1.29 and Section 9.13; 
(b)  Swimming Pools which shall be enclosed with a solid or chain link fence not less than four feet in height; 
(c)  Home Occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 22.1. 
5.2.4  Conditional Uses. Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a R-1 District. Conditional uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18. 
5.3 - Single-Family Residential District (High Density) R-1A. 
5.3.1  Purpose. To establish a high density, single-family residential zoning district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. Uses in the R-1A District shall be identical to those uses allowed in the R-1 District, but smaller minimum lot size standards in the R-1A District shall allow for higher density development. 
5.3.2  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses - Article 8). All uses permitted in R-1 Residential Districts. 
5.3.3  Accessory Uses. 
(a)  Accessory Buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, including buildings used for maintenance, storage and horticultural purposes. See also: Section 2.1.29 and Section 9.13; 
(b)  Swimming Pools which shall be enclosed with a solid or chain link fence not less than four feet in height; 
(c)  Home Occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 22.1. 
5.3.4  Conditional Uses. Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a R-1A District. Conditional uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18. 
5.4 - Single-Family Residential District (High Density) R-1B. 
5.4.1  Purpose. To establish a high density, single-family residential zoning district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. Uses in the R-1B District shall be similar to those uses allowed in the R-1A District, but smaller minimum lot size standards in the R-1B District shall allow for higher density development. 
5.4.2  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses - Article 8). 
(a)  All uses permitted in R-1A Residential Districts; 
(b)  Condominiums; 
(c)  Townhomes. 
5.4.3  Accessory Uses. 
(a)  All Accessory Uses permitted in R-1A Residential Districts. See also: Section 2.1.29 and Section 9.13; 
(b)  Swimming Pools which shall be enclosed with a solid or chain link fence not less than four feet in height; 
(c)  Home Occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 22.1. 
5.4.4  Conditional Uses. Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a R-1B District. Conditional Uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18. 
5.5 - Residential district (Multi-Family) R-2. 
5.5.1  Purpose. To establish a medium density multi-family dwelling residential zoning district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
5.5.2  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses -Article 8). 
(a)  All uses permitted in R-1, R-1A and R-1B Residential Districts; 
(b)  Two-Family Dwellings; 
(c)  Multi-Family Dwellings; 
(d)  Bed and Breakfast Inns. 
5.5.3  Accessory Uses. 
(a)  All Accessory Uses permitted in R-1, R-1A and R-1B Residential Districts. See also: Section 2.1.29 and Section 9.13; 
(b)  Swimming Pools which shall be enclosed with a solid or chain link fence not less than four feet in height; 
(c)  Home Occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 22.1. 
5.5.4  Conditional Uses. Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a R-2 District. Conditional Uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18. 
5.6 - Residential District (Manufactured Housing) R-3. 
5.6.1  Purpose. To establish a medium to high density residential zoning district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
5.6.2  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses - Article 8). 
(a)  All uses permitted in R-2 Multi-Family Residential Districts; 
(b)  Manufactured Home Community subject to Article 16; 
(c)  Manufactured Homes on individual lots provided the home meets the requirements of Article 15 and the minimum lot and development requirements for an R-3 district, as provided in Section 5.7; 
(d)  Central laundry or sanitation facilities accessory to a Manufactured Home Community, Apartment House, or other Residential Development. 
5.6.3  Accessory Uses. 
(a)  All Accessory Uses permitted in R-2 Multi-Family Residential Districts; 
(b)  Swimming Pools which shall be enclosed with a solid or chain link fence not less than four feet in height; 
(c)  Home Occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 22.1. 
5.6.4  Conditional Uses. Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a R-3 District. Conditional Uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18. 
5.7 - Development standards. 
The following development standards are required in Residential Zoning Districts: 

 
ARTICLE VI. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

6.1 - General purpose. 
Commercial districts should have access from major traffic arteries; however, it is not the intent of this Ordinance to encourage the development of long, narrow strips of commercial development fronting on major arteries, often referred to as "strip commercial" areas. Strip commercial development leads to the eventual formation of commercial slums, damages the traffic carrying capacity of streets, increases congestion, is often incompatible with adjacent residential areas, encourages undue scattering of commercial facilities to the inconvenience of the public, and creates disproportionate costs in the provision of governmental services. Extensions of commercial zoning districts via amendments to this Ordinance should be made principally for the provision of planned, unified commercial areas, and not in such a way that strip commercial areas are encouraged. Extension of commercial zoning should only be made after careful consideration of compatibility with adjacent uses and whether or not other land is available which is already zoned for commercial use. 
6.2 - Commercial District (General Commercial) C. 
6.2.1  Purpose. To establish a general commercial zoning district to provide a wide variety of commercial facilities serving a large market area. 
6.2.2  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses - Article 8). 
(a)  In general, permitted commercial uses include but are not limited to: convenience food stores, book stores, drug stores, news stands, general merchandise stores, gift shops, barber and beauty shops, shoe repair shops, laundry and dry cleaning station (limited to 2,500 sq. ft. floor area), self service laundry, branch banks, post offices, medical and dental clinics; 
(b)  Financial institutions; 
(c)  General retail establishments, including those dealing in secondhand merchandise, automobiles, or used automotive equipment and supplies, including yards for storage of new building materials, but excluding yards for storage or display of any scrap, junk, or salvaged materials; 
(d)  Personal service establishments and offices; 
(e)  Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in restaurants; 
(f)  Commercial recreational uses such as theaters, bowling alleys, pool rooms, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, swimming areas, and the like; 
(g)  Parks, public and semi-public grounds for games and sports, country clubs, recreational and community centers; 
(h)  Hotels and Motels; 
(i)  Funeral establishments; 
(j)  Automobile service and repair establishments including Automobile Service Stations, repair garages and convenience stores that dispense gasoline, subject to the provisions of Section 22.4; 
(k)  Private parking facilities; 
(l)  Public utilities and utility substations, water tanks and towers, including grounds for materials and equipment. All zoning district yard setback requirements must be met and all such uses must be screened against light, fumes, dust, noise or unsightliness, protected against becoming "attractive nuisances" and designed so as not to cause interference with radio or television reception; 
(m)  Signs, subject to the provisions of Article 17; 
(n)  Animal hospitals and veterinary establishments, provided that all animals shall be kept inside enclosed buildings; 
(o)  Car washes; 
(p)  Retail or wholesale business outlets, provided that there is no open storage of junk or salvage materials of any type; 
(q)  Private recreational facilities, provided such facilities are incidental to a permitted use and located on the same premises; 
(r)  Commercial Group Developments; 
(s)  Radio and television stations, excluding transmission or communication towers; 
(t)  Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing care homes with more than ten beds, and orphanages, provided that no such facility shall have a lot area of less than four acres, and no building in connection with such facility shall be located closer than 50 feet from any lot line; 
(u)  Wholesale and distributing centers not requiring over 5,000 square feet of floor area; 
(v)  Cold storage; 
(w)  Public or private primary or secondary schools. 
6.2.3  Accessory Uses. 
(a)  Accessory Uses are permitted in the Commercial District subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Accessory buildings are prohibited in the Commercial District. 
6.2.4  Conditional Uses. 
(a)  Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a C District. Conditional Uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18; 
(b)  Single-family residential uses in the Commercial District. 
6.2.5  Curb and Gutter Required for Commercial Developments. All commercial developments must have curbs and gutters, regardless of the size of the lots. When property fronting on an existing City street is subdivided or developed, and the subdivision or development uses said existing street for access, then curb and gutter shall be required along said existing street along the entire property frontage of the development. All curbs and gutters shall be constructed at the expense of the subdivider or developer in accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation standards. 
6.3 - Commercial District (Adult Oriented) A-1A. 
6.3.1  Purpose. The City finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to enact regulations to reduce the possible adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. However, the City also finds that the outright prohibition of such establishments could improperly infringe upon protected forms of expression. Therefore, the purpose of this Ordinance is to reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments in a manner that serves the legitimate governmental interest of reducing criminal activity and protecting property values without unreasonably infringing upon the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. For further reference, see: Title 7, Chapter 8 of the City Code of Ordinances of the City of Wrens, Georgia. 
6.3.2  Location of Adult Entertainment Establishments. Adult Entertainment Establishments are restricted to the following locations: 
(a)  Adult Entertainment Establishments shall only be located within a A-1A District. 
(b)  No Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following: 
(1)  Any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for single or multi-family uses or purposes; 
(2)  Any parcel of land upon which a church, school, licensed day care center, governmental building owned or operated by a government, library, civic center, public park, playground, hospital, nursing home or community club is located; 
(3)  Any parcel of land upon which another Adult Entertainment Establishment is located; 
(4)  Any parcel of land upon which an establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
6.3.3  Site Requirements. 
(a)  The minimum lot area for an Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be one acre with a minimum 120 feet of road frontage on a public right-of-way; 
(b)  Buildings and structures established in connection with an Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be set back at least 50 feet from any property line; 
(c)  Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
6.3.4  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses - Article 8). Adult Entertainment Establishments (See: Section 2.1.7). 
6.3.5  Accessory Uses. All Accessory Uses permitted in C Commercial Districts. 
6.3.6  Conditional Uses. Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a A-1A District. Conditional Uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18. 
6.4 - Development standards. 
The following development standards are required in Commercial Zoning Districts: 

 
ARTICLE VII. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

7.1 - General purpose. 
The industrial zoning districts established in this Ordinance are designed to promote and protect public health, safety and general welfare. The general goal of such districts is to provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the City's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related activities, with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites. In addition, such districts are designed to protect adjacent residential/commercial areas and to protect the labor force in other establishments engaged in less offensive types of manufacturing and related activities, by restricting those manufacturing activities which involve danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards, or create offensive noise, vibration, smoke and other particular matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare and other objectionable influences to those limited areas for which such protection is appropriate. These regulations are also designed to protect manufacturing and related development against congestion, as far as is possible and appropriate in each area by limiting the size and number of buildings in relation to the land around them and to one another, and by providing space off public streets for parking and loading facilities associated with such activities. 
7.2 - Industrial District (Light Industrial) I-1. 
7.2.1  Purpose. To establish a zoning district intended to provide areas for light industrial uses and related wholesaling, warehousing, and storage, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects. This district is not intended to accommodate general commercial uses or residential uses. 
7.2.2  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses - Article 8). 
(a)  Light manufacturing operations including predominately indoor industrial activities involving only those operations generating no significant particular or gaseous emissions or excessive noise which could create harmful or unpleasant effects outside the immediate area of activity, including operations such as assembly, binding, engraving, fabricating, freezing, optical goods, grinding, packaging, printing, physical processing, research, storage or testing of previously manufactured components or previously prepared materials; 
(b)  Wholesaling, warehousing, bulk storage, supply, and distribution operations; 
(c)  Truck and bus terminals; 
(d)  Freight and trucking terminals; 
(e)  Business offices associated with, and secondary to, individual industrial uses within the district; 
(f)  Hotels and Motels; 
(g)  Crematory; 
(h)  Automotive repair establishments (major and minor repairs); 
(i)  Dry Cleaning Stations; 
(j)  Trade schools and technical schools engaging in education or training of an industrial nature; 
(k)  Lumber and building supply yards and related offices, yards for storage of contractors' equipment and supplies, outdoor storage of material, supplies, or equipment; 
(l)  Scientific, technical, and medical laboratories, and research facilities, subject to Section 22.3; 
(m)  Radio and television stations, including related transmission or communication towers; 
(n)  Cellular towers and Personal Communication Service (PCS) towers; 
(o)  Veterinary clinics, Kennels, and Animal Hospitals; 
(p)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, crop harvesting, vineyards, and orchards; 
(q)  Commercial Group Developments; 
(r)  Signs, subject to the provisions of Article 17; 
(s)  Coal yards; 
(t)  Wholesale distributors of gasoline, fuel oil, agricultural chemicals, fertilizers, and liquified petroleum gases; 
(u)  Public or private primary or secondary schools; 
(v)  Fairgrounds; 
(w)  Convenience Stores/Gas Stations, subject to Section 22.4. 
(x)  Manufactured home sales, farm equipment sales, boat sales, or other similar establishment selling large items which cannot reasonably be stored indoors, but excluding the display of scrap, salvaged, second-hand products or junk; 
7.2.3  Accessory Uses. 
(a)  Accessory Uses are permitted in a I-1 District subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Accessory buildings are permitted in a I-1 District, provided such structures are not less than ten feet from any front, side or rear property line. See: Section 2.1.28. 
7.2.4  Conditional Uses. Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a I-1 District. Conditional Uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18. 
7.3 - Industrial District (Heavy Industrial) I-2. 
7.3.1  Purpose. To establish a zoning district intended to provide areas for basic and heavy industrial use and related uses, to encourage the proper design, placement, and grouping of industrial uses, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects. This district is not intended to accommodate general commercial uses or residential uses. 
7.3.2  Permitted Uses. (See Table of Permitted Uses - Article 8). 
(a)  All uses permitted in I-1 Industrial Districts; 
(b)  Manufacturing plants, processing plants, and industrial uses which would not produce excessive noise, vibration, smoke or particulate matter in the atmosphere, offensive odors, excessive levels of toxic or noxious matter in the atmosphere or into water bodies, dangerous levels of radiation, hazards of fire or explosion, excessive heat, humidity or glare, or electromagnetic interference, or other similar conditions which would be incompatible with adjacent development outside of the Heavy Industrial District in which the use is located; 
(c)  Warehousing, wholesaling, bulk storage, supply, and distribution; 
(d)  Truck and bus terminals; 
(e)  Communication towers and transmitters; 
(f)  Buildings used by Federal, State, County, or City governments; 
(g)  Private heliports; 
(h)  Junk Yards, salvage yards, scrap yards, vehicle wrecking and second-hand materials operations, including processing, display, and sale thereof; 
(i)  Agricultural uses, such as general farming, truck farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, crop harvesting, vineyards, and orchards; 
(j)  Wholesale distributors of gasoline, fuel oil, agricultural chemicals, fertilizers, and liquefied petroleum gases; 
(k)  Industrial Group Developments; 
(l)  Single-family or two-family dwellings for watchmen or caretakers, provided that such a dwelling is located on the premises of the primary permitted use, and provided that a resident of the dwelling is employed by the industry or establishment as a watchman or caretaker; 
(m)  Retail or wholesale business outlets operated as part of a manufacturing establishment. 
7.3.3  Accessory Uses. All Accessory Uses permitted in I-1 Industrial Districts. 
7.3.4  Conditional Uses. Only those Conditional Uses provided for in Article 8 of this Ordinance are permitted in a I-2 District. Conditional Uses are subject to the approval of the City Council and those conditions listed in Article 18. 
7.3.5  Vehicle Wrecking, Junk and Salvage Yards. The following regulations shall apply to all Junk Yards, vehicle wrecking yards and salvage yards: 
(a)  No vehicle wrecking, junk or salvage yard shall be located closer than 300 feet from any residential zoning district; 
(b)  All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed fence or wall except driveway areas. Fences or walls shall be not less than eight feet in height and shall be opaque at the street frontage. Storage between such fences or walls and the street or property line is expressly prohibited. Any fence or wall erected for screening purposes shall be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition. All fences must be setback at least 50 feet from a public road right-of-way, and at least 25 feet from side and rear property lines; 
(c)  Wrecking, junk and salvage yards are permitted only in I-2 Zoning Districts as provided for in this Ordinance. 
7.4 - Development standards. 
The following development standards are required in Industrial Zoning Districts: 

 
ARTICLE VIII. - TABLE OF PERMITTED USES 
The following uses are subject to the applicable provisions of the zoning district in which they are located, unless specified otherwise: 
Table 8.1.A Uses Permitted In Residential Zones 

 
Table 8.1.B Uses Permitted In Commercial & Industrial Zones 

 
Note: "P" is permitted, "X" is prohibited and "CU" is a Conditional Use and N/A is Not Applicable 
ARTICLE IX. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

9.1 - Application of zoning ordinance. 
Except as otherwise provided, no structure or land shall, after the adoption of this Ordinance, be used and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or moved unless in conformity with the requirements herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located. The provisions of this Ordinance, in their interpretation and application, shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the City. 
9.2 - Area and setback requirements. 
Except as provided herein, no building or structure shall be erected on a lot unless such a building or structure, enlargement, addition or alteration conforms with the area regulations and setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
9.3 - Reduction of lot area. 
No lot shall be reduced, divided, diminished or so maintained that the yards, other open space or total lot area should be smaller than prescribed by this Ordinance, nor shall the density be increased in any manner except in conformity with the regulations herein established. 
9.4 - Yards apply to only one building. 
No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
9.5 - Only one main building on a lot. 
Every building hereafter shall be located on a lot as defined herein. In no case shall there be more than one main residential building and its accessory buildings on one lot. Apartments, Townhouses, Condominiums are considered as one main residential building. 
9.6 - Public street frontage. 
No dwelling unit shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least one accepted public street for the minimum lot width for the applicable zoning district as provided in Section 5.7. 
9.7 - Intersection visibility and corner setback. 
In all zoning districts, no construction, structures, fences, hedges, bushes, outdoor uses or other obstructions to a clear view which extend over three feet in height shall be permitted at any corner of intersecting streets where either or both of the streets are less than 60 feet in width. Exceptions may be made for utility pole lines, lighting standards, U. S. Postal Mail boxes, traffic signs, and trees. The branches of trees shall be kept trimmed to a height of eight feet above the ground. Buildings having nonconforming setbacks shall be excepted from the requirements of this Section. 
In all zoning districts, where the aforementioned obstructions are in excess of three feet in height and where either or both of the streets are greater than 60 feet in width and these structures, shrubs or outdoor uses are of such character as to constitute a permanent, regular, or temporary obstruction to vision, they shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way line of each street at all intersections so as to eliminate hazards and/or nuisances to the general public. 
9.8 - Front yards on a through lot. 
At each end of a through lot there shall be a front yard of the depth required by this Ordinance for the zoning district in which each street frontage is located; provided, that one of the front yards may be utilized as a rear yard. 
9.9 - Group housing. 
Any parcel of land including any interior streets and recreation areas, which are occupied by a group of dwellings designed as a unit, may be deemed to be one lot. Group housing consists of two or more residential buildings to be constructed on a lot at least one acre in area not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street or lot layout makes it impracticable to apply the requirements of this Ordinance to the individual building units in such group housing, the provisions of this Ordinance may be varied. This variance from the application of these requirements to such group housing must be done in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood and that will insure a lot area per family and a standard of open space no less than the amount required by this Ordinance in the zoning district in which the proposed group housing is to be located. All special exceptions, as provided in this paragraph, which existed at the time this Ordinance became effective, shall be regarded as non-conforming uses. 
9.10 - Building setbacks. 
(a)  In each of the zoning districts described herein, no building, structure, sign or obstruction of any character shall be erected on any land abutting a Federal or State Highway closer than ten feet from the right-of-way of said highway without authorization from the City Council. 
(b)  On every road, street or highway in the City, no building, structure, or obstruction or part of a building or structure or obstruction of any character shall be erected on any land abutting the road, street or highway closer than 35 feet from the right-of-way line of such road, street or highway. In commercial and industrial districts, this restriction shall not apply to any sign advertising the principal use of the property on which such sign is erected or placed. Signs shall be placed in accordance with those standards provided in Article 17. Billboards, as defined in this Ordinance, shall meet all required sign setbacks as provided in this Ordinance. No sign of any kind shall be located within any sign setback required by this Ordinance. The only sign of any kind permitted in a right-of-way shall be the Federal or State standard highway sign marking system. 
(c)  These regulations regarding building setbacks shall be applicable to any new roads, streets or highways hereafter created to the same extent as to roads, streets or highways in existence and of public record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance. These regulations shall likewise be applicable to any roads, streets or highways or areas which have been or may be designated as Arterial Highways on any Thoroughfare Plan adopted by the Commission, the Federal Highway Administration or the Georgia Department of Transportation showing the location or proposed location of roads, streets or thoroughfares of the City. 
(d)  These regulations regarding building setbacks when applied to any property abutting a road, street or highway or when applied to property abutting an area designated as an Arterial Highway on any Thoroughfare Plan may be subject to the following exception: 
For a vacant lot between two existing buildings, the building line setback required for such proposed building shall be equivalent to the average building line setback of the permanent buildings located within 300 feet of either side of the building site, counting any undeveloped frontage as if it were developed at the required setback distances from the street or right-of-way. For this exception to apply, said vacant lot must be in existence at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance. 
9.11 - Building lines. 
Front building lines shall conform to the existing building lines in the block (in the event of undeveloped land, a block shall be considered as a distance of 300 feet on either side of the proposed site). Where there are no buildings on the block, the front building line shall be not less than 50 feet from the established street or right-of-way line. For Commercial and Industrial districts, the front building line shall not be less than 35 feet from the established street or right-of-way line. 
9.12 - Building height requirements. 
Except as provided elsewhere in this Ordinance, no building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or altered to exceed the height limit established for the zoning district wherein such building or structure is located. 
9.13 - Accessory buildings. 
Accessory structures shall include all detached (meaning freestanding and independent) structures, regardless of use. Structures attached to the principal building in a substantial manner by an adjoining roof, wall or foundation are considered additions and must meet requirements applicable to the principal building. Accessory structures shall be permitted provided that they adhere to the requirements of this Ordinance. All attached or detached Accessory Buildings in residential zoning districts shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  All Accessory Buildings shall have the same side yard setback required for the principal structure as specified elsewhere in this Ordinance; 
(b)  No Accessory Building shall be constructed on a lot prior to the time of the construction of the principal building to which it is an accessory; 
(c)  All Accessory Buildings shall have a rear yard setback of not less than ten feet, including eaves and other overhanging portions of the structure; 
(d)  No Accessory Building shall be closer than twenty feet (20 ft.) to any other structure on the same lot or parcel of land; 
(e)  All Accessory Buildings shall be constructed on either concrete poured slabs, pole design or concrete block; 
(f)  The aggregate square footage of all Accessory Buildings on a lot shall not exceed 50 percent of the heated ground floor area of the principal structure; 
(g)  No Accessory Building shall be permitted in the front yard. Accessory Buildings are permitted only in rear or side yards; 
(h)  No Accessory Building shall exceed fifteen feet (15 ft.) in height. 
9.13.1  Accessory Buildings, Portable. 
(a)  Portable Accessory Buildings are prohibited in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(b)  Portable Accessory Buildings shall be permitted in residential zoning districts provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The dimensions of a portable accessory building shall not exceed 250 square feet; 
(2)  Portable Accessory Buildings shall not be placed in the front yard of a residence; 
(3)  A residential lot shall have no more than one Portable Accessory Building; 
(4)  Portable Accessory Buildings shall not be used as a residence or dwelling; 
(5)  All setback requirements relating to Accessory Buildings must be met for rear and side yards; 
(6)  The owner shall obtain a building permit from the City prior to constructing, moving, placing or erecting a Portable Accessory Building on a lot. 
(c)  Portable Accessory Buildings shall be allowed on a lot prior to construction of the principal structure only when a valid building permit has been issued for construction of the principal structure. In the event the building permit for the principal structure expires or is revoked, the Portable Accessory Building must be removed from the property. This period shall commence on the date of issuance of the building permit for the principal structure and end at the time the building permit expires or is revoked. 
9.14 - Completion of existing buildings. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of a building actually under construction at the time of passage of this Ordinance provided, however, that such building and use thereof was lawful under the Zoning Ordinance existing at the time construction or the use commenced. 
If any amendment to this Ordinance is hereafter adopted changing the boundaries or zoning districts or changing the provisions of this Ordinance with regard to buildings or uses legally existing, or to buildings legally under construction or to building permits legally issued, in the area affected by such amendment at the time of the passage thereof, such amendment shall not cause such use to be terminated or to bar the occupancy of such building unless provided by other proceedings at law. 
9.15 - Land use permits required. 
Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by this Ordinance, no building, sign, or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a Land Use Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building, structure, land, water, or premises without a Land Use Permit for such use or occupancy. Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by this Ordinance, no land use activity including land disturbance shall be initiated without a Land Use Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator, and except in conformity with said Land Use Permit. It shall be unlawful to erect, move, add to, structurally alter any building or structure, use or occupy or permit the use of any occupancy of any building, structure, land, water, or premises, or initiate any land use activity that is in violation of an approved Land Use Permit. 
9.16 - Building permits required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or structure, including Accessory Buildings, or to commence the moving, alteration, or renovation of any structure, including Accessory Buildings, until the Building Inspector has issued a building permit for such work. Said building permit shall contain a statement that the plans, specifications and intended use of such structure in all respects conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
9.17 - Application for building permits. 
(a)  An application for a building permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector on forms provided by the City to the property owner or the property owner's agent. It is the sole responsibility of the property owner to assure that the building permit has been properly issued. The application shall be accompanied by the Building Permit Application Fee. It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector to approve the plans or issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has reviewed and inspected the application and related plans in detail and found them to be in conformity with this Ordinance. 
(b)  Site Plan: An application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing: 
(1)  A copy of the plat of survey prepared by an Engineer or Surveyor; 
(2)  The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
(3)  The shape, height and location of building(s) or structure(s) to be erected or altered on the lot; 
(4)  The sizes, locations, and use of all existing buildings or structures on the lot; 
(5)  A statement describing the intended use of the building(s) or structure(s) to be erected or altered; 
(6)  The number of dwelling units the building, if residential, is designed to accommodate; 
(7)  The layout of off-street parking and unloading spaces; 
(8)  Signature of the Jefferson County Health Officer approving the proposed location of a septic tank and field lines, provided public sewerage is not available; 
(9)  Identification of the type of soil the dwelling or structure will be built upon (certain soils will require a soil bearing pressure test to be performed prior to permit issuance); 
(10)  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be useful in determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed. 
(c)  Interpretation of Ordinance: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, the building permit applicant shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, welfare, morals and convenience of the general welfare. The lot or yard areas required by this Ordinance for a particular building shall not be diminished and shall not be included as part of the required lot or yard areas of any other building. The lot or yard area of buildings existing at the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be diminished below the requirements herein provided for buildings hereafter erected or altered, and such required areas shall not be included as part of the required areas for any building hereafter erected. 
(d)  Issuance: Prior to a permit being issued by the Building Inspector for the erection, moving, alteration, renovation, enlargement or construction of any building or structure or use of premises, the plans and intended use shall indicate conformity in all aspects to the provisions of this Ordinance. If a building permit is refused, the Building Inspector shall state the reasons for such refusal in writing. A copy of the Building Inspector's written refusal shall be provided to the applicant. The Building Inspector shall not issue any permit if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any codes, laws or statutes of the City, the State of Georgia, or the United States of America. 
(e)  Duration of Permit Validity: Once issued, the building permit shall become invalid if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period in excess of six months, unless a written extension is granted by the Building Inspector. 
9.18 - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  Certificate of Occupancy: A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged; 
(2)  Change in use of an existing building to a different use; 
(3)  Any proposed change to an existing Nonconforming Use. 
(b)  Application Procedure: 
(1)  No such occupancy, use, or change of use shall take place until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector; 
(2)  The Building Inspector shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy if: (a) the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance; and (b) the building, as finally completed, complies with the plans upon which the building permit was issued. If a Certificate of Occupancy is refused, the Building Inspector shall state the reasons for denying the Certificate of Occupancy in writing. A copy of the Building Inspector's written denial of a Certificate of Occupancy shall be provided to the applicant. 
9.19 - Manufactured home building permit. 
A building permit shall be required for the construction of a Manufactured Home stand or for the placement of a Manufactured Home on a lot. 
9.20 - Filing and recording of plat. 
No plat of a subdivision within the City shall be filed with or recorded by the Superior Court Clerk of Jefferson County, Georgia, until the final plat has been submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
9.21 - Unauthorized conveyances. 
No lot, street, alley, improvement, easement, right-of-way or other property or property right of any kind shall be conveyed, by deed or otherwise, to the City, a governing authority or other public authority without its express acceptance of such conveyance as indicated by the signature of its authorized agent on such deed or other instrument of conveyance. 
9.22 - No subdivision without plat approval. 
No person may subdivide land except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. In particular, no person may subdivide his/her land unless and until a final plat of the subdivision has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and said plat has been recorded in the Office of the Superior Court Clerk of Jefferson County, Georgia. 
9.23 - Plat approval not acceptance of dedication offers. 
The approval of a plat does not constitute acceptance by the City of the offer of dedication of any streets, sidewalks, parks, drainage areas or other public facilities shown on a plat. 
9.24 - Protection against defects; dedication of public facilities. 
For protection against defects which occur within one year after acceptance of the dedication of the public facilities, the City shall require: 
(a)  Whenever occupancy, use or sale is allowed before the completion of all facilities improvements intended for dedication, then, the Performance Bond or the Surety that is posted shall guarantee that any defects in such improvements or facilities that appear within one year after the dedication of such facilities or improvements is accepted shall be corrected by the developer. 
(b)  Whenever all public facilities or improvements intended for dedication are installed before occupancy, use or sale is authorized, then, the Performance Bond or the Surety that is posted shall guarantee that any defects in such improvements or facilities that appear within one year after the dedication of such facilities or improvements is accepted shall be corrected by the developer. 
(c)  An engineer or architect retained by the developer shall certify to the City that all facilities and improvements to be dedicated to the City have been constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. This certification shall be a condition precedent to acceptance by the City of the offer of dedication of such facilities or improvements. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the term "defect" refers to any condition in publicly dedicated facilities or improvements that require the City to make repairs in such facilities over and above the amount of routine maintenance that they would normally require. If such defects appear, the guarantee may be enforced regardless of whether or not the facilities or improvements were constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
9.25 - Maintenance of dedicated areas until acceptance. 
All facilities and improvements with respect to which the owner makes an offer of dedication to public use shall be maintained by the owner until such offer of dedication is formally accepted by the City or other appropriate public authority. 
9.26 - Street access control. 
In order to promote the safety of motorists and pedestrians and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict, the following regulations shall apply: 
(a)  Vehicular ingress/egress from properties to streets shall not exceed 30 feet in width; 
(b)  No more than two points of vehicular ingress/egress from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted for lots with a road frontage of 100 feet or more. Lots with less than 100 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of ingress/egress to any one public street; 
(c)  No point of ingress/egress shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersection; 
(d)  No curbs on City streets or right-of-ways shall be cut or altered for ingress/egress without approval of the City; 
(e)  An ingress/egress driveway shall not be located closer than ten feet to the nearest edge of another such driveway on the same street; 
(f)  The Zoning Administrator may permit, depending on safety issues and traffic use, a point of ingress/egress within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of a street intersection. 
9.27 - Improvements; streets. 
The City or other public authority shall not hereafter accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or lay or authorize the laying of any water mains, sewers, connections or other public facilities or utilities in any street unless: (a) it has been accepted as opened; or (b) otherwise has received the legal status of a public street; and (c) it corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on the final plat approved by the Building Inspector. The City may locate and construct a street or may accept a street provided that the matter is submitted to the Commission and to the Building Inspector for approval or disapproval in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Upon such approval, any such street shall have the status of an approved street as fully as though it had been originally shown on a subdivision plat duly approved according to these regulations. 
9.27.1  Street Names. No street or road shall be named on a plat or in a deed or by other instrument without review by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may recommend to the Commission or City Council a change in the name of any proposed or existing street in the City: (a) when there is a duplication of names or other conditions which tend to confuse the public; (b) when it is found that a change may simplify marking or identification of streets; or (c) upon any other good and just reason that may appear. The City Council shall have final authority in naming public streets. 
9.28 - Appeals from decisions. 
It is the intention of this Ordinance that all questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance shall be presented to the Commission only on appeals from the decision of the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator or other City official. Appeals are processed in accordance with the provisions of Article 24. 
9.29 - Record of application for permits. 
Records of applications for all Building Permits and Certificate of Occupancy and written denials shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or property involved. 
ARTICLE X. - LAND SUBDIVISION 

10.1 - Purposes. 
This Article is adopted for the following purposes: 
(a)  Promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economic development of the City and to guide future growth; 
(b)  Ensure that lands subdivided are of such character that they can be used for building purposes without danger to the health or safety of residents, and to secure safety from fire, flood, or other menace; 
(c)  Prevent the pollution of air, land, streams, and ponds, as well as encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City, and preserve the topography and beauty of the community and the value of land; 
(d)  Ensure the proper provision of improvements such as drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, and transportation facilities; 
(e)  Provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land; 
(f)  Establish procedures for the subdivision and re-subdivision of land in order to further the orderly development of land; 
(g)  Provide for the proper monumenting of subdivided land and proper legal descriptions; 
(h)  Help eliminate costly maintenance problems that develop when streets and lots are established without proper consideration given to various public purposes; 
(i)  Facilitate and inform lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge needed to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
10.2 - Delegation. 
10.2.1  Delegation of Powers to Commission. The Commission is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, and disapprove preliminary plats of major subdivisions, and to grant Variances from the requirements of this Ordinance. 
10.2.2  Delegation of Powers to Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove final plats of minor subdivisions and minor re-subdivisions, lot combination plats, lot line adjustments, dedication plats, and construction plans. The Zoning Administrator shall also be authorized to review plans for major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions for conformity to the requirements of this Article, and to make reports and recommendations to the Commission on major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions, and to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. 
10.2.3  Delegation of Powers to City's Engineer. The City's Engineer is vested with the authority to require and approve land development improvements and to require improvement guarantees for public improvements as specified in this Ordinance. 
10.2.4  Powers of City Council. The City Council is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve and disapprove final plats of major subdivisions. 
10.3 - Administration. 
10.3.1  Initiation of Application. Applications for land subdivision shall be available in the City Clerk's office. Applications for land subdivision shall be accompanied by payment of a filing fee as established by the City Council from time to time. 
10.3.2  Pre-application Conference. Prior to the filing of any application to subdivide pursuant to this Ordinance, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend a pre-application conference with the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to provide applicants with the best available information regarding development proposals and processing requirements, and to ensure the availability of complete and accurate information for review of said application. Upon request of the applicant, the Zoning Administrator will answer questions and provide any other information that must be submitted to satisfy application requirements. 
10.3.3  Fee. The fee for applications to subdivide land will be established by the City Council from time to time. 
10.3.4  Meeting Scheduled. Upon receipt of a completed preliminary plat application, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the application for the next regular meeting of the Commission and shall forward all pertinent materials in the application to the Commission for review. A complete application for preliminary plat approval must be submitted at least 21 days before the regular meeting date of the Commission to be considered on that agenda. The Commission's review of and action on a preliminary plat shall be based on whether or not the preliminary plat meets the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance, and all other City Ordinances that relate to the proposed subdivision. 
10.3.5  Complete Application. Any application for action under this Article must be complete before it shall be accepted for processing. 
10.3.6  Application Contents. All applications for land subdivision shall include those items listed in Table 10.10.A. All applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk along with all applicable fees. 
10.3.7  Withdrawal of Application. Any petition for an application to subdivide may be withdrawn at any time prior to the decision of City Council on said application by the person or entity initiating such a request, upon written notice to the Zoning Administrator. In the event of such withdrawal, no filing fee for the application will be refunded by the City. 
10.3.8  Limitation on New Applications. In a case where an application to subdivide land is denied by the City Council, the same or substantially similar application shall not be eligible for resubmittal and reconsideration until six months has elapsed from the date of said denial. 
10.4 - Applicability and general provisions. 
10.4.1  Applicability. These subdivision regulations shall apply to all real property within the corporate limits of the City. 
10.4.2  Land is One Tract until Subdivided. Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval and said plat has been properly recorded, the land comprised within the subdivision shall be considered one tract, or as otherwise legally recorded. 
10.4.3  All Land Subdivisions to Comply. No person shall sell, advertise, or offer to sell, by deed, map, plat or other instrument, any subdivided parcel of land which has not been subdivided in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or sell land by reference to, or by exhibition of, or by other use of, a plat of a land subdivision that has not been approved and recorded in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. The description of such land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer shall not exempt the transaction from the subdivision requirements of this Ordinance. No plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Jefferson County and it shall be unlawful to record such a plat of land subdivision, unless and until it has been approved in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
10.4.4  Preliminary Plat and Plans Required Prior to Construction. No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any lot prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, if required by this Ordinance, nor prior to the approval of construction plans and engineering plans for said improvements as required by this Article. 
10.4.5  Building and Other Permits. No Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, on any parcel of land regulated by this Article that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
10.4.6  Public Streets and Lands. No land dedicated as a public street or for other public purpose shall be opened, extended, or accepted as a public street or other public land unless such improvements are constructed in accordance with the specifications of this Ordinance and said land and/or improvements are formally approved and accepted as public improvements by the City Council in accordance with procedures established in this Ordinance. 
10.4.7  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the Zoning Administrator, City's Engineer, or other official responsible for the administration of this Article may file an appeal to the Commission in accordance with Article 24 of this Ordinance. 
10.4.8  Exemptions from Plat Approval. The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this Ordinance; provided, however, that such exemption shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements established in this Ordinance: 
(a)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds; 
(b)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or institutional use; 
(c)  The creation of leaseholds for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon; 
(d)  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the City to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable regulations of the zoning district concerning lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
10.5 - Design requirements for blocks. 
10.5.1  Block Length. Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals so as to provide adequate cross traffic. Blocks in residential subdivisions should not exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 600 feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from these standards. The Commission may require pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block to be located near the center in blocks longer than 800 feet. (See Figure 10.5.A). 
10.5.2  Block Width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries. (See Figure 10.5.A). 
Figure 10.5.A Block Width 
10.6 - Design requirements for lots. 
10.6.1  Natural Features and Assets. In the subdividing of land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic sites or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness to the proposed development and safety from hazards. 
10.6.2  Access and Minimum Lot Frontage for Land Subdivisions. Each subdivision lot shall have access to a public street and a minimum lot width for the applicable zoning district as provided in Section 5.7 of this Ordinance; provided, however, that the local governing body may permit one or more lots to be accessed by private streets, as more fully specified in Section 10.14 of this Ordinance; provided further, that in the case of a lot accessed by a circular cul-de-sac, the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to 86 feet. 
10.6.3  Adequate Buildable Area Required. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or that is unsuitable for residential or other use for topographical or other reasons, shall not be platted for residential use or for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or of property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and said building site shall be located outside of the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by the provisions of this Ordinance. (See Figure 10.6.A). 
Figure 10.6.A Buildable Area 
10.6.4  Lot Remnants Not Permitted. All remnants of lots below any required minimum lot size that may be required, left over after subdividing a larger tract, must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. The Zoning Administrator may permit a lot remnant for a specific purpose such as a detention pond, provided that access and design is appropriate and the lot remnant is restricted to specific non-building use. 
10.6.5  Service Areas. Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to the use intended. 
10.6.6  Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than that established by the zoning district in which the subdivision is located. 
10.6.7  Lot Width. No lot shall have a lot width less than that established by the zoning district in which the subdivision is located. For lot widths, refer to Table 5.7.A for Residential lot widths, Table 6.4.A for Commercial lot widths and Table 7.4.A for Industrial lot widths. 
10.6.8  Flag Lots. Flag lots are not permitted within the City. 
10.6.9  Side Lot Lines. In so far as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
10.6.10  Corner Lots. Corner lots shall have adequate width to meet the front building setback requirements, if applicable, from all rights-of-way. 
10.6.11  Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots or "through" lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from Arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Double frontage lots with frontage on a major Arterial street shall allow space for screen planting along the lot line abutting the major Arterial street. 
10.6.12  Survey Monuments For All Lots Required. For all subdivisions, a Georgia registered land surveyor shall install permanent survey monuments at all property corners and on land lot lines prior to final plat approval. Lot corners shall be marked with metal rods not less than one-half inch in diameter and 18 inches in length and driven so as to be stabilized in the ground. Permanent survey monuments shall be installed in accordance with the Technical Standards for Property Surveys of the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. 
10.6.13  Lot Combinations. An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the Zoning Administrator and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. (See Figure 10.6.B). 
Figure 10.6.B Lot Combinations 
10.6.14  Boundary Line Adjustments. One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the City Council and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the Zoning Administrator and recorded. Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. (See Figure 10.6.C). 
Figure 10.6.C Boundary Line Adjustment 
10.7 - Easements. 
Where a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream traverses a subdivision, there shall be provided a storm water or drainage easement of adequate width. Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the City's Engineer. Where easements are needed for utility locations, the subdivider shall provide them to the appropriate utility provider. Where easements are needed for public water and/or sanitary sewer lines, they shall be provided as determined appropriate by the City's Engineer. All easements required pursuant to this section shall be shown on the preliminary plat, if required, and final plat. 
10.8 - Preliminary plat. 
10.8.1  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions and land developments through the submittal of a tentative map of a major subdivision for review and approval by the Commission. 
10.8.2  When Preliminary Plat Required. All major subdivisions, and any subdivision involving the dedication of a public street, shall require the submission of a preliminary plat to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval by the Commission. Prior to the issuance of any permit for land disturbance or for construction of any improvements, the Commission must approve the preliminary plat, if said plat is required. 
10.8.3  Preliminary Plat Application and Specifications. Preliminary plat applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 10.10.A and preliminary plats shall meet the minimum plat specifications shown in Table 10.10.B. Additionally, the words "Not for Final Recording" shall be noted on the preliminary plat. 
10.8.4  Land Use Permit Required. Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by this Article, no building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a Land Use Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building, structure, land, water, or premises without a Land Use Permit for such use or occupancy. Unless specifically exempted or otherwise provided by this Ordinance, no land use activity including land disturbance shall be initiated without a Land Use Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator, and except in conformity with said Land Use Permit. It shall be unlawful to erect, move, add to, structurally alter any building or structure, use or occupy or permit the use of any occupancy of any building, structure, land, water, or premises, or initiate any land use activity that is in violation of an approved Land Use Permit. 
10.8.5  Planning and Zoning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Commission shall consider all applications to subdivide land. It shall render a recommendation to the City Council on all such applications, and the Commission's action and recommendation shall be only advisory. The Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. The Commission shall render a recommendation within 32 days after its meeting on the application has been held. The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall notify the applicant in writing of the Commission's action or recommendation within two days of the Commission's decision. 
10.8.6  Disposition. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of one year, during which time a complete construction plan application must be submitted. If a completed application for construction plans is not submitted during this period, preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void. 
10.8.7  Appeal. Denial of preliminary plat approval by the Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
10.8.8  Amendments to Approved Preliminary Plats. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats. Any proposed amendment to a sketch plat that is determined by the Zoning Administrator to constitute a public interest shall be deemed a major amendment. For amendments to preliminary plats determined to be major amendments, Commission approval shall be required. The Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed major amendment to a preliminary plat. Procedures for considering a major amendment to a preliminary plat shall be the same as required for an initial application for preliminary plat approval. 
10.9 - Construction plans. 
10.9.1  Application. Upon approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider or land developer may apply for construction plan approval. In the case of a minor subdivision, or in cases where a preliminary plat is not required by this Article, the subdivider or land developer shall apply for approval of construction plans; provided, however, that the applicant attends a pre-application conference with the Zoning Administrator to ensure that the construction plans prepared are in accordance with the intent and specific provisions of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations. The construction plan approval process is administrative. Applications for construction plan approval shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 10.10.A and Table 10.10.B. No application for construction plans shall be accepted for processing nor approved by the Zoning Administrator until a preliminary plat, if required, has been approved by the Commission and the proposed construction plans are found by the Zoning Administrator to be in substantial conformity with said preliminary plat approval and any conditions of such approval. 
10.9.2  Zoning Administrator's Decision Criteria. The Zoning Administrator may deny construction plan approval if: (a) the applicant fails to meet the requirements of this Ordinance or any other applicable local regulations; or (b) the applicant's construction plans and application fail to meet the requirements of preliminary plat approval as specified by the Commission. 
10.9.3  Certificate of Approval. All copies of the construction plans shall contain an inscription on the plans noting the approval of the Zoning Administrator and the City's Engineer. Construction plan approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year, unless activity toward improvements on the land has been initiated or unless the Zoning Administrator approves an extension of time. 
10.10 - Final plat. 
10.10.1  When Required/Specifications. All major subdivisions and public dedications shall require final plat approval. Final plats are submitted to the City Council for approval. Final plat applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 10.10.A and final plats shall meet the minimum plat specifications shown in Table 10.10.B. 

 
10.10.2  Criteria for Final Approval. The City Council may grant final plat approval if the following conditions, as applicable, are met: 
(a)  The Commission has previously approved a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision; 
(b)  Where new improvements are involved in the subdivision, construction plans have been approved by the Zoning Administrator, and all improvements have been installed by the developer and inspected by the City's Engineer, and subdivision improvement guarantees as required by this Ordinance have been submitted; 
(c)  The final plat meets all applicable requirements of this Ordinance; 
(d)  The final plat has been approved by the Zoning Administrator; 
(e)  A complete final plat application has been submitted, including all supporting materials required by this Article for final plats. The Zoning Administrator's denial of a final plat shall be permitted only upon specific findings that one or more of the above-referenced conditions have not been met. 

 
N/A is not applicable. 
10.10.3  Approval Certificate. Upon approval of the final plat, a certificate, stamped directly on the plat, shall state: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Wrens, Georgia, and all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given preliminary approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission and final plat approval by the City Council on ____________ , 20 ____________ , and it is entitled to recordation in the Clerk's Office, Jefferson County Superior Court." 
10.10.4  Additional Plat Certificates. In addition to information required by Table 10.10.B to be supplied on a final plat, each final plat shall contain the following certificates: 
(a)  Surveyor's Certificate : A certificate by a surveyor directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or persons under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and that their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all surveying requirements of the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Wrens, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 
By: ____________ ____________  Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No.: ____________ " 
(b)  Licensed Engineer's Certificate: A certificate by a licensed engineer directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Wrens, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 
By: ____________ ____________  Registered C. E. No. ____________  Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No.: ____________ " 
(c)  Owner's Certificate. A certificate by the owner directly on the final plat, signed in an appropriate manner as follows: 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, and that all State, City and County taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. Said owner donates and dedicates to the public for use forever the street right-of-way as shown on this plat. 
____________ ____________  Property Owner  Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of: 
____________ ____________  Witness 
____________ ____________  Notary Public" 
10.11 - Dedications of streets and public lands. 
Subdivision streets and rights-of-way and other lands to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted and dedicated by the City only upon the delivery to the City Council of a general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of such rights-of-way and lands. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by an attorney's certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the City Council certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and further that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. Acceptance of such dedication shall be accomplished by Resolution of the City Council, a certified copy of which shall be attached to both the warranty deed of dedication and the final plat. 
10.12 - Subdivision improvement guarantees. 
In order to protect the City and prospective purchasers of lots and other residents of a subdivision, the subdivider/developer shall provide to the City financial security to guarantee the installation of public improvements. The subdivider's or developer's financial guarantee may be any of the following: 
(a)  An escrow of funds held by the City; 
(b)  An escrow with a bank or savings and loan association upon which the City can draw; 
(c)  An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the City can draw; 
(d)  A performance bond for the benefit of the City upon which the City can collect, or a certificate of deposit with assignment letter; and 
(e)  Any other form of guarantee approved by the City Council that will satisfy the objectives of this section. The guarantee shall be in an amount to secure the full costs, as determined by the City, of constructing or installing the improvements and utilities required. 
10.13 - Limitations on minor subdivisions. 
10.13.1  Purpose. Minor subdivisions provide certain advantages, such as a shorter application process and less public scrutiny, that tend to favor their use over the filing of major subdivision applications. Given these advantages, the prospect exists that subdividers may seek to divide a tract of land via consecutive and/or contiguous minor subdivisions instead of filing for a major subdivision. It is the intent of the City Council to prohibit the practice of "chain" subdivisions where the same land owner subdivides land and then files minor subdivision applications on common contiguous parcels, which collectively total more than four lots. It is also the intent of the City Council to prohibit development of minor subdivisions adjacent to each other within a three-year time period in situations where part of an original tract of land is now owned by another person or entity and was transferred or sold to another owner with the apparent intent to circumvent the major subdivision process. 
10.13.2  Common Contiguous Parcels Shown on Minor Subdivision Plats. Contiguous Common Parcels, as defined by this Ordinance, shall be referenced on all applications for minor subdivisions and Contiguous Common Parcels shall be considered part of any application for minor subdivision, for purposes of determining whether or not the division of land proposed is a major subdivision or a minor subdivision. Contiguous Common Parcels shall not be counted as lots in the case of a minor subdivision. 
10.13.3  Limitations. Land within a minor subdivision, including all Contiguous Parcels owned by the subdivider, shall not be further divided for a period of three years unless a preliminary plat application is filed and approved as a major subdivision pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance. If property proposed to be subdivided was part of an original tract, and if the property proposed to be subdivided abuts land that has been divided as a minor subdivision in the last three years, then minor subdivision of said property shall be prohibited. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the approval of two contiguous minor subdivisions under separate ownership; however, this provision is intended to be construed liberally so that one property owner does not develop a minor subdivision on part of an original tract and transfer or sell another part of the original tract for the purposes of creating or developing minor subdivision within a three year period. It is the intent of this Ordinance that land abutting a minor subdivision that was owned by the subdivider shall not be subdivided as a minor subdivision for a period of three years, regardless of ownership. 
10.14 - Private streets. 
10.14.1  Private Streets Permitted. Private streets may, upon application, be permitted by City Council within major subdivisions, subject to the requirements of this Ordinance. Applications for approval of private streets shall be considered by the City Council following preliminary plat approval by the Commission. Following a recommendation by the Commission to authorize private streets in a major subdivision, the City Council shall consider the application and may impose conditions on the approval of private streets to ensure various public purposes and to mitigate potential concerns with private streets. No final plat providing for a private street shall be approved or recorded unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this Section. 
10.14.2  Construction/Engineering Plans Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first submitting engineering and construction plans and obtaining approval from the Zoning Administrator and the City's Engineer in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
10.14.3  Standards. All private streets shall be constructed in accordance with all standards for public streets as required by this Ordinance, applicable construction specifications of the City's Engineer, and as approved by the City's Engineer. 
10.14.4  Street Names and Signs. Private streets shall be named, subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. The subdivider of land involving a private street shall install street signs with content containing the street name and the designation "private," as approved by the Zoning Administrator. The sign signifying the private street may be required by the Zoning Administrator to be a different color than that of street signs provided for public streets, in order to distinguish public or private maintenance responsibilities. 
10.14.5  Easements for Private Streets. Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general-purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of the private street. At a minimum said easement shall be of the same width as is required for the right-of-way of a public street as determined by the City's Engineer, for the type of public street (local, collector, etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street. Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of lot size or density limitations established by this Ordinance. No lot shall be permitted to be divided by the general purpose public access and utility easement required and established for a private street. For private streets, the general-purpose public access and utility easement shall either: 
(a)  Be shown on the final plat in a manner that each lot fronting the private street extends to the centerline of the private street; or 
(b)  Be shown on the final plat as a separate parcel to be dedicated to a private Homeowners Association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot). 
10.14.6  Maintenance. The City shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general-purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. A private maintenance covenant recorded with the County Clerk of the Jefferson County Superior Court shall be required for any private street and/or other improvements within general-purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for non-compliance with the terms of the covenant, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms: 
(a)  The private maintenance covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to satisfy the costs of ordinary maintenance and describe procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. The Covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association in cases of a subdivision of seven or more lots fronting on a private street; 
(b)  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule; 
(c)  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private street; 
(d)  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street; 
(e)  The covenant shall run with the land; 
(f)  The City Council may, at its discretion, as a condition of approving private streets, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond to be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners association, or the Council may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the City's Engineer into an escrow account or other suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private streets and storm water management improvements, to be drawn from by the homeowners or property owners association as maintenance and repair needs may arise. 
10.14.7  Specifications for Final Plats Involving Private Streets. The City Council shall not approve for recording any final plat involving a private street unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
(a)  Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required by this Section; 
(b)  "PUBLIC NOTICE: the City of Wrens has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general-purpose public access and utility easements for private streets as shown on this plat."; 
(c)  "Grant of Easement. The general-purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the City, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such utilities. 
____________ ____________  Signature of Property Owner"; 
(d)  The following certificate of dedication shall be required, unless the City Council waives the dedication requirement: 
"Certificate of Dedication. All water and sewer lines installed within general-purpose public access and utility easement(s) for private street(s) as shown on this plat are hereby dedicated to the City of Wrens. 
____________ ____________  Signature of Property Owner." 
10.14.8  Requirement for Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Responsibilities. 
(a)  Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the City, the buyer of said lot shall execute a notarized Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibilities as described below. A copy of the Purchaser's Acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be submitted along with an application for a building permit to construct a building, dwelling or structure on said lot. 
(b)  Form of Acknowledgement: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility 
(I)/(We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction ____________ (insert address or attach legal description). (I)/(We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am)/(we are) purchasing and requires (me)/(us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am)/(we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots in this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me)/(us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my)/(our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees. (I)/(We) further understand that the City of Wrens has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general-purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the lot in question. (I)/(We) understand that a copy of this Purchaser's Acknowledgement shall be required as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for a building on the lot (I am)/(we are) purchasing. 
____________ ____________  Purchaser 
____________ ____________  Purchaser." 
10.15 - Improvements required for subdivisions and land development. 
10.15.1  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish minimum design requirements, standards, and specifications for improvements within subdivisions and land developments. 
10.15.2  Authority of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to review and approve plans for subdivisions and land developments to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator is further authorized to prepare and promulgate standards, standard drawings, and specifications to more specifically implement the intent of the improvement requirements of this Ordinance. 
10.15.3  Applicability. The improvement requirements specified within this Section shall not apply to individual lots proposed for development as a detached, single-family dwelling or manufactured home. All improvements required to be constructed as part of a major subdivision, minor subdivision, or land development process, shall be constructed and improved in accordance with the standards and specifications for construction as required by this Ordinance and as specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
No person to which this Section applies shall commence construction of any improvements on any land prior to the approval of construction plans and engineering plans for said improvements, as required by Section 10.9 of this Ordinance. No building permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, on any parcel of land that does not meet the improvement requirements specified herein. 
10.15.4  Engineered Drawings. Engineering drawings for proposed public streets, including cross sections and centerline profiles, and public and private water, sewer, drainage, and utility systems, certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia, shall be required and shall be submitted for review and approval, and such plans shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance and the specifications of the City's Engineer. Prior to approval and recording of a final plat, or prior to the approval of any Certificate of Occupancy, a registered engineer for the subdivider/developer shall submit four copies of all finished as-built plans of improvements, demonstrating that said improvements, as installed, meet the requirements of this Section and certifying that the plans accurately reflect actual construction and installation. The City's Public Works Department shall maintain all copies of as-built street and utility plans for future use by the City. 
10.15.5  Permits for Utility Construction In Public Right-of-Way. Permits from the Zoning Administrator shall be required for construction in any public right-of-way. Permits will not be issued until such time that construction plans have been submitted and approved by the Building Inspector. 
10.15.6  Improvements to Abutting Land. For subdivisions and land developments that abut and access a public street, the subdivider or land developer shall install curb and gutter, sidewalk, other road improvements, and, if required, a deceleration lane, in accordance with standards and specifications provided in this Ordinance, along all abutting public streets. When a subdivision or land development uses an unpaved public street right-of-way for access, the subdivider or land developer shall improve that street and/or right-of-way to a pavement width consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance in addition to installing curb and gutter. Said improvements shall be constructed from the subdivision or land development entrance to the paved City road which the Zoning Administrator determines will be the primary direction of travel for residents of the subdivision or occupants of the land development. 
10.16 - Standards for configuring new streets. 
10.16.1  Street Alignment, Intersections and Jogs. Streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (90 degrees), but in no case shall such a street intersection be less than 75 degrees. Where street offsets or jogs cannot be avoided, offset "T" intersections shall be separated by a minimum centerline offset of 50 feet in all areas. (See Figure 10.16.A). 
Figure 10.16.A Street Intersections and Jogs 
10.16.2  Continuation of Existing Streets and Connections. Existing streets, and their rights-of-way, shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. The Commission may require that a major subdivision provide one or more future connections to adjoining subdivisions or unsubdivided tracts. 
10.16.3  Street Plans for Future Phases of the Tract. Where the site plan proposed to be subdivided or developed includes only part of the tract owned or intended for subdivision or development by the subdivider or land developer, a tentative plan of a future street system for the portion of the tract not proposed for immediate subdivision consideration may be required by the Commission and if required shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider or land developer. 
10.16.4  Dead-End Streets and Culs-De-Sac. Streets that dead-end shall terminate in a cul-de-sac. The maximum length of such streets shall be 600 feet in distance. Streets that are planned to continue at some future date shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac. 
10.16.5  Marginal Access Streets. Whenever a major subdivision is proposed abutting the right-of-way of a United States or State of Georgia highway, a marginal access street (service road) approximately parallel and adjacent to such right-of-way may be required by the Commission at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between such marginal access street and highway right-of-way. The Commission may also require a 20 foot no-access easement and planting strip along the major Arterial street to ensure that lots fronting on said street do not have direct access thereto. (See Figure 10.16.B). 
Figure 10.16.B Marginal Access Streets 
10.16.6  Alleys and Service Access. Alleys are permitted only with the approval of the Commission. If alleys are permitted, they must be paved with asphalt or concrete. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible; but if unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities. Service access shall be provided to commercial and industrial developments for off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
10.17 - Requirements for streets. 
10.17.1  Street Material. All streets will be paved with plant mix asphalt or concrete. 
10.17.2  Bridges. Bridges on public rights-of-way shall meet all standards provided by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
10.17.3  Grading and Stabilization of Street Right-of-Way. When a new public street is proposed, all trees, brush, stumps, rocks, or other debris shall be cleared from the street right-of-way. All streets shall be graded to lines, grades and cross sections as approved on plans. All unsurfaced disturbed portions of street rights-of-way shall be stabilized by seeding, fertilizing, liming and mulching or by another equally effective method. 
10.17.4  Radius at Street Intersections. The right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be a minimum of 15 feet, with larger radii for streets serving nonresidential development, as approved by the City's Engineer. The minimum pavement (curb) radius at street intersections shall be 25 feet. 
10.17.5  Street Grades. No street grade shall be less than one percent. No street grade for an Arterial or Collector street shall exceed eight percent. No other local street grade shall exceed 12 percent, unless the Zoning Administrator finds that due to topographic conditions, a steeper grade is necessary, in which case the street grade shall not exceed 15 percent. Street grades between 12 percent and 15 percent shall not exceed a length of feet. 
10.17.6  Minimum Street Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths. Street right-of-way and pavement widths shall comply the following: 

 
10.18 - Access specifications. 
10.18.1  Entrance Improvement Specifications. Roadway entrances and improvements, including necessary acceleration and/or deceleration lane(s) and right/left turn lanes, shall be designed, installed, and maintained as approved by the State Department of Transportation, as applicable, or the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with State regulations or the provisions of this Ordinance. All entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the State Department of Transportation and the Zoning Administrator prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. All entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any City street shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. 
10.18.2  Access for Land Subdivision. No access driveway shall be permitted to be located closer than 50 feet to the nearest existing or proposed right-of-way of an intersecting roadway or closer than 40 feet to a side property line unless the adjacent property owner is in agreement with the location of the driveway and approval is obtained from the Zoning Administrator. Curb cuts or access driveways shall have a minimum width of 24 feet from back of curb to back of curb. Strict adherence to these requirements may not be practical in all instances as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may limit the maximum width of a curb cut and/or the number of curb cuts to a lot as necessary when it is deemed to be of benefit to the safety and welfare of the public. 
The following factors may be considered during the review and approval of a specific location of an entrance: the location of existing or planned median breaks; separation requirements between the entrance and major intersections; separation requirements between other entrances; the need to provide shared access with other sites; the need to align with previously approved or constructed access points on the opposite side of the street; and the minimum number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and off the site safely and efficiently. 
10.18.3  Interparcel Connections. New development that contains or is intended to contain more than one building or use on a site shall provide connections so that automobile travel between and among such buildings or uses can be accomplished without using a highway or major street. Where possible and practical, new developments and substantial improvements to existing developments shall provide for pedestrian and automobile access connections between adjacent properties under different ownership when the uses of the properties are of such compatibility that patrons may frequent both buildings or uses in the same vehicle trip. 
10.19 - Street lighting. 
All major subdivisions and land developments shall provide street lighting along all public streets and along existing streets abutting the subdivision or land development. Street lighting shall be provided at street corners and intersections or at least every 300 feet, whichever is greater. 
10.20 - Street signs/traffic control signs. 
Signs for street names, directions of travel, traffic control, and hazards shall be provided as directed by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation standards. Street signs on exterior/boundary streets shall be installed by the City with the developer paying a proportionate share determined by the City. Street signs for interior streets of a subdivision or land development shall be installed at the subdivider or developer's expense by the subdivider or developer, subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
Unless otherwise provided in standards and specifications adopted by the City, street signs shall meet the following specifications: 
(a)  Signs shall be constructed of aluminum sheets with reflective backgrounds; 
(b)  Information on the street name signs shall be readable from both sides of the sign; 
(c)  Signs shall be installed on a steel or wooden post; 
(d)  The vertical distance from the road elevation to the bottom of the sign face shall be seven feet with a minimum post burial depth of three (3) feet. 
10.21 - Drainage and stormwater management. 
10.21.1  General Requirements. An adequate drainage system, separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and including any necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water for all subdivisions and land developments. Plans showing the size and location of all drainage structures shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer employed by the developer. The Zoning Administrator may require the use of on-site control methods such as retention or detention to mitigate the storm water and drainage impacts of the proposed subdivision or land development. The Commission shall not approve any preliminary plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for storm and flood water runoff channels or basins. No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or the land development an adequate system of drainage and storm water management. 
10.21.2  Method of Design and Capacity. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the Rational Method, or other methods as approved by the City's Engineer, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with required plans. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area within the site and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. Capacity for a ten year storm or rain shall be provided for all street drainage structures such as catch basins, inlets, cross drains, etc. Capacity for a 100 year frequency storm event shall be provided for all main drainage structures such as retention basins, principal storm sewers, and all types of flood protection works. 
10.21.3  Location. Drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications provided in this Ordinance, with approval of the City's Engineer. Catch basins shall be located at low points of streets. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road right-of-way and with satisfactory access to the road. 
10.21.4  Discharge. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot or land development site to adjacent lots, land development sites, or vacant properties. Storm water shall not be discharged directly to perennial streams. It shall be directed toward natural drainages. If water must be discharged to a stream, the water quality flowing into the stream must meet or exceed the water quality of the receiving waters. The water quantity flowing into the stream must be evaluated to ensure the stream channel can accommodate the increased flows and not disrupt or degrade the ecology of the water body. 
10.21.5  Grading and Site Drainage. Lots or land development sites shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and drainage for individual lots or land development sites shall be coordinated with the general storm water drainage pattern for the area. Buildings and parking lots shall be appropriately drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. All disturbed or graded ground areas of a building site not used for buildings or open storage areas shall be appropriately stabilized and grassed or covered with plants or landscaping materials. 
10.21.6  Cross Drainpipes. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, the design of which shall be approved by the City's Engineer. Cross-drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural waterflow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadways and the required slopes. Cross drainpipes shall have head walls of an approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. Pipe installed within the right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe. All storm drainpipes shall have a minimum diameter of 18 inches. Storm sewer slopes shall be equal to or greater than one percent. All downstream receiving streams shall include a minimum 20 feet of rip rap. 
10.21.7  Drop Inlets. Drop inlets shall be generally three-foot by three-foot boxes with two-foot by three-foot grates unless otherwise specified by the City's Engineer. 
10.21.8  Curbs and Gutters Where Required. 
(a)  Curbs and gutters shall be installed in all major subdivisions in accordance with requirements of this Ordinance. Minor subdivisions shall not require curbs and gutters. All commercial and industrial subdivisions and land developments must have curbs and gutters, regardless of the size of the lots. When property fronting on an existing City street is subdivided or developed, and the subdivision or land development uses said existing street for access, then curb and gutter shall be required along said existing street along the entire property frontage of the subdivision. All curbs and gutters shall be constructed at the expense of the subdivider or developer in accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation standards. 
(b)  All streets and roads not required to include curbs and gutters shall be graded, paved, and drained and shall comply with all construction and drainage standards for ditches, slopes, and grassing in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(c)  Curbs shall be concrete which shall be class A 3000 psi strength at 28 days. The typical curb minimum section shall be six inches by 24 inches by 12 inches. (See Figure 10.21.A). 
Figure 10.21.A Curb and Gutter Detail 
10.21.9  Easements. Where an irrigation ditch or channel, natural creek, stream or other drainage way crosses a subdivision or land development, the subdivider or developer shall provide an easement sufficient for drainage and maintenance. Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the City's Engineer. When a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or intermittent stream, a storm water or drainage easement of at least 20 feet on each side of the water course bank shall be provided. 
10.22 - Water. 
10.22.1  Generally. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or the land development an adequate water supply. 
10.22.2  Water Main Requirements. When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, according to specifications of the City's Engineer. All water mains shall normally be at least six inches in diameter and piping material of PVC C900 Class 200 or better, except that pipe of lesser size may be used if properly looped and adequate water pressure is maintained in accordance with standards established by the American Water Works Association. Pipe of less than six inches shall not be used except in unusual cases. Water lines shall be installed at least 18 inches below grade. Water mains within subdivisions and land developments must be provided with connections to each lot in the subdivision and each land development, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
10.22.3  Public Water System. All subdivisions and land developments shall connect to the existing municipal/and or county water supply at the time of constructing improvements. 
10.22.4  Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all nonresidential land developments and all residential subdivisions. Fire hydrants with appropriate water pressure at appropriate intervals shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer throughout the subdivision or land development. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and shall be within 500 feet of any dwelling. Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the Chief of the City Fire Department. Fire department connections shall be not less than 18 inches or more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the City Fire Department. Water lines that serve hydrants shall be at least six inch lines, and, unless no other practicable alternative is available, no such line shall be a dead-end line. The male plunger servicing hydrants shall be at least four and one-half inches in length. To eliminate future street disturbance, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street within the right-of-way shared by such underground utilities. 
10.23 - Sewer. 
10.23.1  Generally. All buildings, dwellings, and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. Each subdivision and land development shall be served by adequate sewage disposal facilities. No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or the land development an adequate system of wastewater collection and treatment. 
10.23.2  Connection to Public Sewerage System. All subdivisions and land developments not already connected to the county or city sewerage system at the time of plat submission must apply to the Commission to connect to the city sewerage system. The Commission may deny any request if the city sewerage system lacks the capacity to accommodate the subdivision or land development, or if funds are unavailable to increase capacity to accommodate the subdivision or land development. Septic tanks shall only be permitted in a subdivision or land development after the subdivider or developer's application has been denied. (See also: The City of Wrens Sewer Use Ordinance). 
10.23.3  Septic Tanks. Where individual onsite wastewater disposal systems are allowed and proposed, individual lot sizes and shapes must exhibit appropriate regard for the particular health, drainage, and maintenance characteristics on the site. Additionally, detailed soil tests may be required in order to verify the ability of the lots to safely contain and dispose of septic system effluent. All septic tanks and onsite wastewater disposal systems are subject to the approval of the Jefferson County Health Department. 
10.24 - Utilities. 
All utility facilities, including but not limited to electric power, telephone, and cable television, shall be located above ground or underground throughout the subdivision or land development. Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities, private and public, and such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide. When topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities along the rear lot lines of a subdivision, lot, or land development site, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access. 
10.24.1  Oversizing of Improvements and Utilities. The subdivider or land developer shall construct such oversized improvements and utilities that the City's Engineer determines are necessary, provided that the subdivider or land developer shall not be obligated for the additional cost of improvements and utilities that are not uniquely required for that development, and provided the subdivider agrees to a proposal by the City's Engineer to share in the cost arrangements for over-sizing improvements and utilities. A formula may be developed by the City to provide for a sharing of the cost of other improvements needed to serve the subdivision or land development when certain improvements are necessary to serve future subdivisions or developments in the vicinity. 
10.25 - Administrative inspection and acceptance of public improvements. 
Upon completion of public improvement construction, the subdivider or land developer shall notify the Zoning Administrator and request an inspection. The Zoning Administrator shall inspect all public improvements and shall notify the subdivider or land developer in writing of nonacceptance or preliminary acceptance. If the public improvements are not acceptable, the reasons for non-acceptance shall be stated and corrective measures shall be outlined in a letter of notification. Upon notification, the subdivider or land developer shall correct all deficiencies identified in the non-acceptance letter within the time limit established by the Zoning Administrator. Once deficiencies are corrected, the subdivider or land developer shall request a re-inspection in writing. The Developer will maintain improvements for one year follow the date of final plat approval. 
10.26 - Administration, appeals, enforcement and penalties. 
10.26.1  Administration and Interpretation. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer, interpret, and implement the provisions of this Article. To this end, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to prepare administrative procedures, guidelines, and application forms to address other administrative details not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article. The Zoning Administrator may delegate administrative functions, powers and duties assigned by this Article to other staff as may be appropriate, without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. 
10.26.2  Appeal of an Administrative Decision or Interpretation. Any person who alleges that there has been an error by the Zoning Administrator in administration or interpretation of this Article shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator to the Commission, as more specifically provided in Article 24 of this Ordinance. 
10.26.3  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce this Article and to bring to the attention of the City Council any violations or lack of compliance therewith. The Zoning Administrator may delegate enforcement functions, powers, and duties assigned by this Article to other staff as may be appropriate, without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. 
10.26.4  Refusal of Permits or Permissions. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits or permissions on any new project or application pursuant to this Article where the applicant, applicant's business, or agent has failed or refused to comply with this Ordinance. Furthermore, permits and permissions may be denied by the Zoning Administrator when taxes are outstanding on the property proposed for subdivision or land development. 
10.26.5  Stop Work Order. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to issue written "stop work" and "cease and desist" orders for any activity that fails to comply with the provisions of this Article. Such "stop work" or "cease and desist" orders may be lifted at such time the Zoning Administrator is satisfied that a good faith effort is being made to comply with applicable provisions of this Ordinance. Nothing shall prevent the Zoning Administrator from reissuing "stop work" and "cease and desist" orders where warranted. 
10.26.6  Complaints. Whenever a violation of this Article occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint with the Zoning Administrator. Said written complaint shall state clearly and fully the address of the property that is the subject of the complaint; the name of the subdivider/owner of the property; the factual allegations supporting the complaint; and a citation to the provisions of this Article that are alleged to have been violated. A written complaint must be signed and dated by the person filing the complaint. The Zoning Administrator shall investigate the complaint and take action thereon as may be appropriate to enforce the provisions of this Article. 
ARTICLE XII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

12.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of Planned Unit Development (PUD) regulations is to encourage and allow more creative and imaginative design of land developments than is possible under zoning district regulations. PUDs are intended to allow substantial flexibility in planning and designing a proposal. This flexibility often occurs in the form of relief from compliance with conventional zoning ordinance site and design requirements. Ideally, this flexibility results in a development that is better planned, that contains more amenities, and ultimately a development that is more desirable to live in than one produced in accordance with typical zoning ordinance and subdivision controls. An intrinsic, and often neglected, premise upon which the approval of a PUD must be conditioned, is that while greater density or more lenient site requirements may be granted, the PUD should contain features not normally required of traditional developments. To enable a thorough analysis of a PUD, more information will be requested about the proposal than would be required if the development were being pursued under conventional zoning requirements. 
12.2 - Permitted uses. 
A PUD may contain uses not permitted by the use regulations of the zoning district in which said development is located upon approval by the Commission. After a public hearing, the Commission may authorize a nonconforming use, provided: 
(a)  That the uses permitted by such exception are reasonable or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the private purpose of the development; and 
(b)  That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to cause a detrimental effect or influence on the surrounding neighborhood; and 
(c)  The minimum square footage of heated space on the ground floor of any primary structure is 1,520 square feet. 
12.3 - Limitations. 
The provisions of this Article are applicable in all zoning districts provided the area of the proposed property contains a minimum of ten contiguous acres. In calculating the minimum area for a PUD, the measurement shall not include the area of any previously dedicated streets or alleys. 
12.4 - Conditions to be met by planned unit developments. 
12.4.1  Zoning District Regulations. Every building development erected and maintained under the provisions of this Article shall comply with all of the provisions established by this Ordinance for the zoning district in which the building group is located except the regulation requiring a separate building lot to be provided and maintained for each principal structure. 
12.4.2  Site Plan and Improvements. A special plan for a PUD shall address, and there shall be provided, the following: 
(a)  Drainage: Adequate facilities for the drainage of surface water, including storm sewers, gutters, paving and the proper design of finished grades, when requested by the Zoning Administrator; 
(b)  Ingress and Egress: Adequate facilities for the convenient circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including sidewalks, driveways, off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, and landscaped separation spaces between pedestrian and vehicular ways; 
(c)  Location of all buildings, structures or dwellings; 
(d)  Recreation Area: adequate and appropriately located play areas for children; 
(e)  Protection of Residential District: In commercial building developments near or adjoining residential districts, adequate provision (including fences, walls and/or planting) to screen and protect the residential districts from parking lot illumination, headlights, fumes, heat, noise, blowing papers, dust, and the visual encroachment of commercial activity on the privacy and neighborhood character of the residential area; 
(f)  A landscaping plan of the entire project showing individual plants and vegetation types; 
(g)  Location of all garbage, trash and/or dumpster receptacles and methods to properly screen from view; 
(h)  Formation of an Incorporated Non-Profit Association (when applicable and/or when required by the City Council as part of a PUD). When the formation of an Incorporated Non-Profit Association is required, as part of a PUD, the developer shall: 
(1)  Create an incorporated non-profit homeowners association, which assures exterior maintenance of each unit and the common areas; 
(2)  Record covenants in the office of the Superior Court Clerk of Jefferson County which automatically make every lot owner an association member; provide the lot owners the right to use the common property; and establish his/her voting rights in the association and his/her obligation to pay its assessments. 
12.5 - Variations and exceptions. 
In the event the tract to be subdivided is of an unusual size or shape or is surrounded by unusual conditions in such a manner that the strict application of the requirements of this Article would result in real difficulties and substantial hardships or injustices, the Commission may vary or modify such requirements, so that the developer is allowed to develop his/her property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and interest of the City is protected and the general intent and spirit of this Article is preserved. 
12.6 - Drawings. 
Three sets of PUD architectural drawings must be submitted to the Commission; one set for building files, one set for the City Fire Department and one set to be returned to the applicant following review by the Commission. 
12.7 - Procedure on planned unit developments. 
12.7.1  Application for Approval. An application for approval of a PUD shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and shall contain the following: 
(a)  Interest and Ownership. The applicant's name, address and interest in the application, and the name, address and interest of every person, firm or corporation represented by the applicant in the application; the concurrence of the owner or owners of the entire land area included in the special plan and a list of all encumbrances on such land; and sufficient evidence to establish that the applicants are all the owners of the designated land area, intending to develop the designated area, and have both the means and ability to develop the designated area. 
(b)  Plans for Building Development. Plans shall contain: (1) a description of the land area included within the special plan, with the boundaries and dimensions and present zoning classification of the area; (2) a description of the adjoining properties and the present zoning classification thereof; (3) all public or private easements and rights-of-way, both existing and proposed, within or bounding the designated area and the adjoining properties; (4) the location of adjacent buildings and the use of the land on adjoining properties; (5) necessary finished grades, curb cuts, driveways, off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, sidewalks, open areas to be set aside for special purposes; (6) the location and height of proposed walls, fences, and screen planting; (7) the types of paving or other surfacing to be used in the various areas; and (8) such other site information as may be necessary to describe completely the proposed building development. 
12.7.2  Compliance with State Laws. PUDs must comply with the applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
12.7.3  Review of Planned Unit Development by Commission. The Commission shall hold a Public Hearing concerning the PUD application in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Commission shall review each application and shall approve or disapprove the special plan; approval may establish conditions and limitations, which may include a performance bond. The Commission shall, within 30 days of its meeting, forward the application, together with its report of approval or disapproval to the City Council. The Commission shall notify the applicant in writing of the action taken on the application for the PUD. 
12.7.4  Presentation of Planned Unit Development to the City Council. Once the PUD application has been forwarded by the Commission, the plan shall be presented to the City Council for final action. Action by vote shall be taken within 45 days after the application has been submitted to the City Council for consideration. If the Council fails to vote within the 45 day period, the time for Council action on the PUD will have expired and the PUD application will be considered disapproved. For the purposes of Section 12.7.8 of this Ordinance, the disapproval of a PUD application resulting from a non-vote of City Council shall be considered a "final act" of the City Council. 
12.7.5  Registration of Planned Unit Development. Upon approval of a PUD, a copy of the development plan shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The development plan shall thereafter be binding upon the applicants, their heirs, successors, and assigns; shall limit and control the issuance and validity of permits and certificates, and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and structures within the area designated in such PUD; provided however, that the Zoning Administrator may, upon a showing of engineering necessity, permit minor changes in the location of structure and site improvements if such minor changes will not change the character of the development Minor changes shall not: (a) increase the gross floor area of any structure; (b) change the intensity of use or ground coverage; (c) reduce the total building site area or the space between buildings; (d) change the ratio of off-street parking area and off-street loading area to gross floor area; or (e) otherwise cause the PUD to fail to meet the conditions specified in this Article. 
12.7.6  Amendment or Withdrawal of Planned Unit Development. Pursuant to the same procedures and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which the PUD was initially approved and filed, any PUD may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely, if all land and structures remaining under such PUD comply with all the conditions and limitations of this Article and all land and structures withdrawn from such PUD comply with all zoning requirements and building regulations established by this Ordinance. 
12.7.7  Fees. At the time of filing a PUD application, the party or parties proposing the PUD shall deposit with the City Clerk an application fee of $400.00 and an additional $50.00 per each additional acre over ten acres. The application fee is intended to cover the cost(s) of this procedure, and under no condition shall such sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of such PUD to be approved by the City Council. The maximum application fee required shall not exceed $1,000.00 for a PUD or an amendment to a PUD. 
12.7.8  One Year Limitation. Whenever a PUD is filed with the Zoning Administrator, and has been finally acted on by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Article, then the Commission and the City Council shall not consider a substantially similar PUD, for the same property, within a period of one calendar year from the date of the City Council's final action on said PUD. 
ARTICLE XIII. - RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND OPEN SPACE 

13.1 - Miniparks required. 
(a)  Subject to Section 13.1(b), all residential land developments shall provide, through reservations or dedication, recreational areas in the form of miniparks in an amount equal to .0025 Acres (108.9 sq. ft.) per person expected to reside in that development. Such recreational areas shall be provided in addition to the open space areas required by Section 13.2. For purposes of this Article, one bedroom dwelling units shall be estimated to house an average of 1.4 persons, two bedroom dwelling units 2.2 persons, three bedroom dwelling units 3.2 persons and dwelling units with four or more bedrooms 4.0 persons. Each lot that is large enough for only a single-family dwelling unit shall be estimated to house an average of 3.2 persons. Each lot that is large enough to accommodate more than single-family dwelling unit shall be estimated to house 2.2 persons for each dwelling unit that can be accommodated. The requirements listed in this Section are equal to the following standards for minipark sizes: 
(1)  One bedroom dwelling unit = 152.46 square feet 
(2)  Two bedroom dwelling unit = 239.58 square feet 
(3)  Three bedroom dwelling unit = 348.48 square feet 
(4)  Four or more bedroom dwelling unit = 435.60 square feet 
(b)  The City Council recognizes that miniparks must be of a certain minimum size to be usable and such miniparks will not serve the intended purpose unless properly maintained. Therefore, residential developments that are small enough so that the amount of required minipark space does not exceed 2,000 square feet are exempt from the provisions of Section 13.1(a) above. However, as used in this Section, the term "development" refers to the entire project developed on a single tract or contiguous multiple tracts under common ownership, regardless of whether the development is constructed in phases or stages. Additionally, subdivided residential developments of less than 25 single-family dwelling units shall also be exempt from the provisions of Section 13.1(a). 
13.1.1  Miniparks; Purpose and Standards. 
(a)  Purpose: The purpose of the minipark is to provide adequate recreational facilities to serve the residents of the immediately surrounding neighborhood within the development. The following are illustrative of the types of facilities that shall be authorized to serve recreational needs and therefore are applied toward satisfaction of the minipark requirements of this Article: basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, sauna and exercise rooms, meeting or activity rooms within a clubhouse and playgrounds. 
(b)  Each development shall satisfy its minipark requirement by installing the types of recreational facilities that are most likely to be suited for and used by persons likely to reside in that development. 
(c)  The total acreage of miniparks required by Section 13.1 shall be apportioned into miniparks of not less than 2,000 square feet nor more than 30,000 square feet. 
(d)  Miniparks shall be attractively landscaped so as to not detract from the surrounding development. Miniparks shall be provided with sufficient natural or man made screening or buffer areas to minimize any negative impacts upon adjacent residences. 
(e)  Each minipark shall be centrally located and easily accessible so that it can be conveniently and safely reached and used by those persons in the surrounding neighborhood it is designed to serve. 
13.2 - Usable open space. 
(a)  All residential developments shall be reasonably developed so that at least five percent of the total area of the development remains permanently as usable open space. 
(b)  For purpose of this section, "usable open space" means an area that: 
(1)  Is not encumbered with any structure or dwelling; 
(2)  Is not devoted to use as a street, parking area or sidewalk; 
(3)  Is left in its natural or undisturbed state if wooded, except for the cutting of trails for walking or jogging, or if not wooded at the time of development, is landscaped for ball fields, picnic areas or similar facilities; 
(4)  Is capable of being used and enjoyed for purposes of informal, unstructured recreation and relaxation; 
(5)  Is legally and practically accessible to the residents of the development or to the public if dedication of the open space is required; 
(6)  Consists of land having no more than twenty five percent (25%) of its area located within a floodplain or floodway. 
(c)  Subdivided residential developments of less than twenty-five (25) single-family dwelling units are exempt from the requirements of this Section unless the City agrees that it will accept an offer of dedication of such open space, and in that case the offer of dedication shall be made. 
13.3 - Ownership and maintenance of recreational areas and required open space. 
(a)  Recreation facilities and usable open space required to be provided by the developer in accordance with Article 13 shall not be a dedication to the public. Instead it shall remain under the ownership and control of the developer, or his/her successor in interest, or a homeowners association or similar organization that satisfies the criteria established in this Ordinance. 
(b)  The person or entity identified in Section 13.4 as having the right of ownership and control over such recreation facilities and open space shall be responsible for the continuing upkeep and proper maintenance of those areas. 
13.4 - Homeowners associations. 
Homeowners associations or similar legal entities that, pursuant to Section 13.3, are responsible for the maintenance and control of common areas, including recreational facilities and open space, shall be established in such a manner that: 
(a)  Provision for the establishment of the association or similar entity is made before any lot in the development is sold or any building occupied; 
(b)  The association or similar legal entity has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over such areas and facilities; 
(c)  The association or similar legal entity has the power to compel contributions from residents of the development to cover their proportionate shares of the costs associated with the maintenance and upkeep of such common areas and recreation facilities. 
13.5 - Flexibility in administration authorized. 
The provisions set forth in this Article concerning the amount, size, location and nature of recreational facilities and open space to be provided in connection with residential developments are established by the City Council as standards that presumptively will result in the development of a certain amount of recreational facilities and open space. The City Council recognizes, however, that due to the particular nature of a tract of land, or the nature of the facilities proposed for installation, or other factors, the underlying objectives of this Article may be achieved even though the standards are not adhered to with mathematical precision. Minor deviations from these standards may be permitted if: (i) the objectives underlying these standards can be met without strict adherence to them; and (ii) certain peculiarities in the developer's tract of land or proposed facilities would make strict compliance with these standards unreasonable. 
ARTICLE XV. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

15.1 - Purpose. 
To set forth requirements for the placement of Manufactured Homes in the City. These requirements address building permits, sanitary permits, moving permits, tie-downs, permanent foundation, connection to electrical, water, and wastewater systems, and Manufactured Home Permits. 
15.2 - Registration and decal. 
Every person, firm, corporation, or other entity holding title to or possessing a Manufactured Home which is placed or located within the limits of the City, shall report the location of this home and shall obtain a Manufactured Home decal from the Jefferson County Tax Commissioner annually, by no later than April 1st of each year. 
The location decal authorizing location of a Manufactured Home within the City shall be the same color as prescribed by state law and shall be affixed to the Manufactured Home at all times it is being used as a residence within the City limits. A location decal shall be affixed to the Manufactured Home in such a manner as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 
15.3 - Authority. 
(a)  The Jefferson County Tax Commissioner shall prescribe application, moving permit, and Manufactured Home decal forms, and thereafter alter and change the same, and said Tax Commissioner shall require applicants to furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purpose hereof. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of this Article. Upon receiving information that a violation of this Ordinance has occurred, the Building Inspector may issue a citation and summons to the alleged violator requiring him to appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court on a day and time certain, to answer the charges contained therein. 
15.4 - Moving permit required. 
(a)  No mover, hauler, person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall move a Manufactured Home to any location beyond the limits of the lot or parcel of land upon which it presently is located, or upon which it was originally located without first obtaining a moving permit from the Jefferson County Building Department authorizing such relocation. No moving permit shall be issued unless the person, firm, corporation, or other entity moving the Manufactured Home specifies the new location to which it is to be moved. 
(b)  It is a violation of this Ordinance for any mover, hauler, person or other entity to move, or to have moved, a Manufactured Home into the City whose destination is within the City limits or move a Manufactured Home out of the City whose location has been in the City limits without first obtaining a moving permit from the Jefferson County Building Department authorizing such relocation. 
(c)  The moving permit authorizing the movement or relocation of a Manufactured Home shall be of a standard color as prescribed by Jefferson County and shall be affixed to the Manufactured Home at all such times the Manufactured Home is being transported within the City limits. 
(d)  It shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any permit required by this Article that the owner of a Manufactured Home submits proof to the governing authority that all State and County taxes accruing and payable with respect to such Manufactured Home have been paid in full. 
15.5 - Specifications and site requirements. 
(a)  Home Specifications. Only Housing and Urban Development (HUD) certified Manufactured Homes will be permitted to locate in the City for residential purposes. (See also: Section 5.7). 
(b)  Site Requirements. All Manufactured Homes must be located on an approved site where the minimum lot size shall be 21,780 square feet or one-half acre. Front, rear and side yard setbacks shall apply according to the zoning district in which the Manufactured Home is located. 
(c)  Manufactured Homes are permitted only in R-3 Residential Districts. 
15.6 - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  A valid permit to move a Manufactured Home into or within the City limits is required prior to applying for a building permit. 
(b)  Permit Application Procedure. 
(1)  Applications for building permits are available at the City Clerk's office. (See Section 9.17 for building permit requirements). 
(2)  The Jefferson County Health Department will determine whether or not a sanitary permit is approved. 
(3)  Building Permits shall be approved or disapproved by the Building Inspector following the issuance of a moving permit by the Jefferson County Building Department. 
(4)  After the building permit is issued, a Manufactured Home may be moved into the City limits and installed for occupancy in accordance with the terms of the permit issued. 
(5)  Installation must comply with Section 15.7 in order to obtain Building Inspector approval. No utilities shall be connected to the Manufactured Home nor shall a Certificate of Occupancy be issued until all of the installation requirements provided in Section 15.7 are met. 
15.7 - Manufactured home installation requirements. 
(a)  Utility Connections. All Manufactured Homes must be permanently connected to water, sewerage and electrical service. 
(1)  Water. Water service shall be provided by the public system. Connection procedures must meet the requirements of the Southern Standard Plumbing Code and must be freeze proof above and below ground. Water connection must be inspected and approved by the Building Inspector. 
(2)  Sewer. Plumbing for the sewerage or septic system must meet the requirements of the Southern Standard Plumbing Code and any Jefferson County Health Department requirements. Any septic tanks and onsite wastewater disposal systems must be approved by the Jefferson County Health Department. Septic tanks shall only be permitted if connection to the City sewerage system is not available. (See also: City of Wrens Sewer Use Ordinance). 
(3)  Electrical. Electrical service must meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code. Electrical connection must be inspected and approved by the Building Inspector prior to authorizing the servicing power company to install permanent power service. 
(b)  Foundation. All Manufactured Homes must be installed on a pier system, installed with permanent skirting, secured with tie-down devices and provided with steps and landings. The installation of all required foundation requirements must be inspected and approved by the Building Inspector. All towing devices, wheels, axles, and hitches must be removed. Installation of skirting and underpinning shall be completed within 45 days of the date the home is placed on the site. 
(1)  Pier System. Piers or load-bearing supports or devices shall be designed and constructed to evenly distribute the loads. Piers shall be securely attached to the frame of the Manufactured Home or shall extend at least six inches from the centerline of the frame member. Manufactured load-bearing supports or devices shall be listed or approved for the use intended, or piers shall be constructed as follows: 
i.  Piers less than 40 inches in height shall be constructed of open or closed cell concrete blocks, each measuring eight inches by eight inches by 16 inches (with open cells vertically placed upon the footer). Single-stacked block piers shall be installed with the 16 inch dimensions perpendicular to the main (I-beam) frame. The piers shall be covered with a two inch by eight inch by 16 inch wood or concrete cap; 
ii.  Piers between 40 inches and 80 inches in height and all corner piers over three blocks high shall be double blocked with blocks interlocked and capped with a four inch by 16 inch by 16 inch solid concrete block, or its equivalent; 
iii.  Piers over 80 inches in height shall be constructed in accordance with paragraph 15.7(b)(1)(ii) above and they shall be laid in concrete mortar with steel reinforcing bars inserted in block cells and the block cells shall be filled with concrete; 
iv.  All piers shall be placed on footings of solid concrete not less than 16 inches by 16 inches by four inches. 
(2)  Skirting. Installation of skirting shall be required. Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Acceptable skirting materials include masonry, stone or brick. 
(3)  Tie Down. Each Manufactured Home shall have tie-downs or other devices securing the stability of the Manufactured Home in accordance with the rules and regulations established and published by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A., § 8-2-160, et seq.). 
i.  Manufactured Homes 14 feet and less in width require two types of anchorage: (i) over the top tie-downs to restrict overturning; and (ii) frame tie-downs to restrict the unit from being pushed from its piers. 
ii.  Manufactured Homes over 14 feet in width ("doublewides") require only frame tie-downs to restrict the unit from being pushed from its piers. 
(4)  Steps and Landings. Steps and landings are required for all homes and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in applicable Building Codes. At each entrance or exit door there must be a landing that is a minimum of three feet by three feet. 
15.8 - Recreation vehicles. 
(a)  The above requirements do not apply to recreation vehicles because they are not acceptable for permanent occupancy and they may not be used for more than 90 consecutive days as a temporary residence. All recreation vehicles must display a current state license tag before movement. Manufactured home permits will not be issued for recreation vehicles. 
(b)  Permanent connection of recreation vehicles to water, sewer or electrical service is prohibited within the City limits. Installation of recreation vehicles on piers and jacks permanently is also prohibited. 
ARTICLE XVI. - MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY 

16.1 - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern the construction, use and operation of all Manufactured Home Communities within the City. 
16.2 - Registration. 
Every person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity owning or operating a Manufactured Home Community, and each such entity engaged in the sale or rental of Manufactured Homes or lots upon which to place them, shall provide the Tax Assessor of Jefferson County on January 1 st of each year a complete list of all Manufactured Homes parked, rented or otherwise located upon any property or any Manufactured Home Community owned or operated by the entity. 
16.3 - Development of a manufactured home community plan. 
A Manufactured Home Community plan shall be developed and drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet and shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
(a)  The name of the community, the name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) and the names and addresses of the designer or surveyor; 
(b)  The date, scale and north arrow; 
(c)  The boundaries of the perimeter of the community; 
(d)  The site plan of the community showing the location of streets, driveways, open areas, parking spaces, service buildings, existing buildings, water courses, easements and Manufactured Home spaces; 
(e)  Minimum front building setback lines for all lots; 
(f)  Name(s) of adjoining property owner(s); 
(g)  The identification and location of all gas, water, electric, telephone, cable, and sewage lines that will serve the community. Street lights, solid waste containers and surface water drainage plans shall also be shown on the plan; 
(h)  The current zoning designation of the tract or parcel of land; 
(i)  Such other information concerning the plan as may be requested by the Zoning Administrator. 
16.3.1  Review and Approval of Plan. Before any permit is issued for construction of a Manufactured Home Community, the plan for the community must be submitted to the Commission to insure that the proposed Manufactured Home Community meets the requirements of this Ordinance. If the plan is approved by the Commission, the Building Inspector shall issue the necessary permits for the construction of the Manufactured Home Community. 
16.4 - Development standards for manufactured home communities. 
16.4.1  Density and Area. 
(a)  The maximum density within a Manufactured Home Community shall not exceed two units per acre. 
(b)  A Manufactured Home Community shall front on a public street, shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet on the public street and shall contain a minimum area of five acres. 
16.4.2  Setbacks. 
(a)  Along Public Streets. There shall be a minimum setback of fifty feet (50 ft.) along all community exterior boundaries which abut a public street; 
(b)  Along Rear and Side Property Lines. All community exterior boundaries not adjacent to a public street shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet; 
(c)  Along Community Streets. There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between a Manufactured Home and any abutting community street; 
(d)  Required Separation Between Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by no less than 30 feet. 
16.4.3  Lot Area. Manufactured Home lots/sites shall have a minimum lot width and area as follows: 

 
16.4.4  Community Improvements. 
(a)  Paving, Soil and Ground Cover Requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of a Manufactured Home Community shall be paved, covered with crushed stone, or other solid material, or protected with grass or other vegetative cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust. 
(b)  Lot/Site Drainage Requirements. The ground surface in all parts of a Manufactured Home Community shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface or storm water in a safe, efficient manner. 
16.4.5  Accessory Storage Buildings for Manufactured Home Communities. One accessory storage building is allowed on an individual lot. The storage building is to be located in the rear yard of the lot and may be located no closer than ten feet to the rear lot line of the individual lot. The maximum size of the storage building shall not exceed 120 square feet in size and shall only be used for storage of personal property of the person(s) living in the Manufactured Home located on the lot. 
16.4.6  Recreation Areas. Recreation areas designed for the common use of residents shall comply with the following provisions: 
(a)  In all Manufactured Home Communities accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or more Manufactured Homes, there shall be one or more recreation areas; 
(b)  The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of 100 square feet per each lot/site in the Manufactured Home Community; 
(c)  Recreation areas shall not be located near high traffic areas, retention ponds or other hazards. 
16.4.7  Street System and Vehicle Parking. 
(a)  Manufactured Home Community Street Systems. Community street systems shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The entrance and exit streets shall be designed to provide safe and convenient access between the public street and the community interior street system; 
(2)  All streets shall be paved with plant mix asphalt or concrete; 
(3)  No local street grade shall exceed 12 percent unless the Zoning Administrator finds that due to topographic conditions, a steeper grade is necessary, in which case the street grade shall not exceed 15 percent. Street grades between 12 percent and 15 percent shall not exceed a length of 150 feet; 
(4)  Minimum pavement widths shall be 20 feet for two-way traffic; 14 feet for one-way traffic; and an additional minimum of seven feet shall be provided for on-street parking, if provided; 
(5)  Each lot or site shall be accessible from abutting streets for all essential and emergency uses by vehicular equipment, including equipment used by public agencies such as fire, police, and ambulance services; 
(6)  The street layout shall be designed to provide for the continuous flow of traffic, with culs-de-sac, with a minimum radius of 50 feet being permissible; 
(7)  Traffic control signs such as "stop," "yield," and "speed limit", shall be placed throughout the community where necessary; 
(8)  Each street shall have a permanent sign installed with a designated name identifying each street; 
(9)  All streets, parking areas, and refuse collection areas shall be maintained by the owner or manager of the Manufactured Home Community; 
(10)  Street lighting shall be provided throughout the community. 
(b)  Vehicle Parking. Off-street parking areas or on-street parking lanes shall be provided for the use of community residents and guests. 
(1)  A minimum area of 400 square feet of paved parking shall be provided for each lot/site; 
(2)  Driveways shall have a minimum width of ten feet; 
(3)  All off-street parking areas or spaces shall have direct access to an interior street. A driveway for a Manufactured Home lot shall not directly access an exterior street. 
16.5 - Manufactured home installation requirements. 
See Section 15.7 for Manufactured Home Installation Requirements. 
16.6 - Water supply, sewage, refuse disposal and utilities. 
(a)  Water Supply. An adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided for the Manufactured Home Community. The source of the water supply shall be through a public water system with the community connecting to the water lines. 
(b)  Sewage System Required. An adequate and safe sewerage disposal system shall be provided in the Manufactured Home Community. Collection systems and sewage treatment facilities shall be approved by the City or by the Jefferson County Health Department if connection to the City sewerage system is not available. 
(c)  Refuse Collection. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the Manufactured Home Community shall be so conducted as to prevent health hazards, rodent harborage or insect breeding areas. 
(d)  Electrical Equipment and Installation. Lot/sites and communities shall have all electrical equipment and installation designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the National Electrical Code. 
ARTICLE XVII. - SIGNS 

17.1 - General principles. 
The City is a community located in the eastern part of the State of Georgia. The City has an economic base which relies heavily on small business, manufacturing facilities, and agriculture. In order to preserve the City as a desirable community in which to live, visit and do business, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of foremost importance. The regulation of signs within the City is a highly contributive means by which to achieve this desired end. These sign regulations are prepared with the intent of enhancing the "small-town" environment and promoting the continued well-being of the City. 
17.2 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, consistent and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements. These sign regulations are intended to: 
(a)  Enable the identification of places of residence and business; 
(b)  Allow for the communication of information necessary for the conduct of commerce; 
(c)  Lessen hazardous situations, confusion and visual clutter caused by proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation and excessive height, area and bulk of signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(d)  Enhance the attractiveness and economic well-being of the City as a place to live, visit and conduct business; 
(e)  Protect the public from the dangers of unsafe signs; 
(f)  Permit signs that are compatible with their surroundings and aid orientation, and preclude placement of signs in a manner that conceals or obstructs adjacent land uses or signs; 
(g)  Encourage signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located and consistent with the category of use to which they pertain; 
(h)  Curtail the size and number of signs and sign messages to the minimum reasonably necessary to identify a residential or business location and the nature of any such business; 
(i)  Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot and building on which the sign is to be placed or to which it pertains; 
(j)  Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of the site or adjoining sites; 
(k)  Regulate signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
(l)  Require signs to be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner; 
(m)  Preserve and enhance the natural characteristics of the community. 
17.3 - Permitting requirements. 
17.3.1  Sign Permit Required. Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this Article, a sign permit is required prior to building, erecting or altering any sign in the City. 
17.3.2  Sign Permit Application. A completed sign permit application with all related materials shall be submitted to the City Clerk along with the sign permit application fee as set by the City Council from time to time. 
17.3.3  Sign Permit Application Contents. Sign permit applications shall include the following: 
(a)  The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(b)  The physical address of the lot on which the sign will be placed; 
(c)  An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all existing signs and structures currently on the lot or other similar documentation; 
(d)  An itemized list and a keyed site plan at a suitable scale showing the location of all proposed signs to be located on the lot or other similar documentation; 
(e)  A scaled drawing with dimensions and specifications, specifying materials, illumination, character sizes, colors, and support systems of each proposed sign; 
(f)  An estimate of the cost of construction of each proposed sign; 
(g)  Any other information that may be reasonably required by the Zoning Administrator. 
17.3.4  Review of Sign Permit Applications. Sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall either grant or deny the sign permit within 14 days of the City Clerk's receipt of the completed sign permit application. 
17.3.5  Issuance of Sign Permit. If the application fully complies with the provisions of this Ordinance, applicable City building codes and all other applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances, the Zoning Administrator shall direct the City Clerk to issue the sign permit. In the event the application is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with a written statement containing the reasons for the denial. 
17.3.6  Appeal from Denial of Sign Permit. If the Zoning Administrator denies the application for a sign permit, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator to the Commission. Applicant's appeal from the denial must be filed, in writing, with the City Clerk within 15 days of applicant's receipt of the Zoning Administrator's written statement containing the reasons for the denial. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall render a decision on the applicant's appeal within 30 days of the City Clerk's receipt of the applicant's written appeal. 
17.3.7  Expiration of Sign Permit for Uncompleted Construction. A sign permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months of the date of issuance. 
17.4 - Signs requiring no permit. 
The signs enumerated in this Section are exempt from sign permit requirements of this Article. However, all signs shall comply with applicable building and electrical code requirements. No signs shall be permitted on the public right-of-way, with the exception of official signs. 
(a)  Official Signs. Official signs erected by or at the direction of a government or legal agency and/or official notices issued by any court, public agency, or officer. 
(b)  Public Notice. No trespassing, no hunting, and similar public notice type signs not exceeding a five square foot display area. 
(c)  Construction Contractor Identification. Four on-premises, non-illuminated signs per construction site. Each sign shall not exceed a five square foot display area. Signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within seven days of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(d)  Real Estate. One on-premises, non-illuminated sign per road frontage. Said sign shall not exceed a five square foot display area. Such signs shall be removed within ten days after the subject lot or building is leased or sold. For real estate signs in excess of these dimensions, see Table 17.12.A. 
(e)  Non-Profit. One on-premises civic, philanthropic, educational or religious entity sign for private and/or special occasions per lot provided that the sign is not illuminated and does not exceed a five square foot display area. For events involving the general public or operated for profit purposes, see Table 17.12.C. 
(f)  Yard/Garage Sales. One on-premise sign announcing residential yard or garage sales per lot. Said sign shall not exceed a five square foot display area. Such signs shall be removed within two days after the conclusion of the sale. 
(g)  Noncommercial. One on-premises sign for noncommercial purposes per road frontage. Said sign shall not exceed a five square foot display area. 
(h)  Commemorative. One on-premise, non-illuminated sign per lot not exceeding a four square foot display area. Such signs include displays of a commemorative nature, such as memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, tablets, cornerstones, and incised names and building dates of structures. 
(i)  Property Identification. Two on-premises, non-illuminated signs per lot, each not to exceed a two square foot display area. Such signs shall display only property identification numbers and names, post office box numbers, names of occupants or other non-commercial identification information. 
(j)  Residential Business. One on-premises, non-illuminated sign per approved residential business (Home Occupation), not to exceed a five square foot display area. Wall signs shall not exceed the height of the lintel of the primary entrance of the residence. Freestanding signs must be set back at least ten feet from right-of-way line and shall not exceed five feet in height. If the sign is on a corner lot, the sign must comply with the corner setback of 15 feet. 
(k)  Plaque. One on-premises plaque per façade entrance, not to exceed a two square foot display area. Plaques shall be affixed near the entrance of the building at a height not to exceed six feet. 
(l)  Open/Closed Sign. One on-premises sign per business, not to exceed a two square foot display area, either wall or freestanding, stating that a business establishment other than a Home Occupation is open during business hours. 
(m)  Sandwich Board/Sidewalk Sign. One on-premises, non-illuminated sign per business (either A-frame or easel structure) placed on the sidewalk. Said sign shall be located in immediate proximity to the entrance of the business. A sidewalk sign shall not exceed four feet in height nor an eight square foot display area. Sidewalk signs are prohibited wherever their placement obstructs the safe flow of pedestrian traffic and no sign may reduce the accessible width of a sidewalk to less than four feet. Said sign shall only be displayed during hours of operation for the business being advertised. Sandwich Board/Sidewalk signs shall be constructed in a professional and workmanlike manner from treated wood or other durable material, and copy displayed shall not be spray painted onto the sign. 
17.5 - Temporary sign permits. 
A temporary sign permit for a period of not more than two weeks may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for the uses set forth below. A sign application does not have to be filed with the City Clerk for a temporary sign. However, the applicant shall obtain a temporary sign permit and file a cash bond with the City Clerk in the amount of $100.00. Said bond will be returned to the applicant upon removal of all temporary signs permitted under this Section. No more than four temporary permits may be issued per calendar year per applicant. Such temporary signs are permitted in addition to any other signs otherwise permitted under the provisions of this Article. Upon expiration of a temporary sign permit, said sign must be removed or the permit holder will automatically forfeit his/her cash bond to the City. 
(a)  Event Signs—General. One sign per lot not to exceed a four square foot display area. Temporary event signs are typically placed along streets or attached to buildings and provide direction to or promote temporary exhibits, shows, or events. 
(b)  Event Signs—Banner. Banner event signs are only permitted in the Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. One banner per lot that promotes special exhibits, shows, promotions or events. Said banner shall not exceed a 32 square foot display area. Banners are prohibited on public utility poles unless approved, in writing, by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Event Signs—Initial Opening or Final Closing of Businesses. Two on-premises signs advertising the initial opening or final closing of a business establishment. Each sign shall not a exceed 32 square foot display area. Said signs are only permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. 
(d)  Fluttering Signs. Fluttering ribbons, streamers, pennants, flags or other similar devices collectively in excess of four feet in length are considered temporary signs and are subject to the provisions of Section 17.5. Flags displayed to commemorate national holidays are exempt from temporary sign permit requirements. 
17.6 - Large sign permits. 
Signs greater than 100 square feet in display area are not permitted in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts without a Large Sign Permit. Signs greater than 100 square feet in display area are prohibited in Residential Zoning Districts. The Zoning Administrator shall review all Large Sign Permit applications and shall grant a permit only if the proposed sign meets the safety and aesthetic standards provided below: 
(a)  Appropriateness. The proposed sign must be conducive to the area; 
(b)  Obstructions. Said sign shall not obstruct the view of any signs in the immediate vicinity; 
(c)  Building Size. The building on which the proposed sign is to be placed is at least 4,000 square feet in wall area fronting the sign; 
(d)  Proportion. Large signs are only appropriate when proportional to the lot size or building size. Proposed large signs must meet at least one but not necessarily all of the following conditions: 
(1)  Road Frontage. The lot on which the sign will be situated fronts at least 1,000 feet of public roadway; or 
(2)  Lot Depth. The depth of the lot is at least 200 feet; or 
(3)  Sign/Building Setback. The proposed sign will be set back no less than 50 feet from the road right-of-way. 
17.7 - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(a)  Signs Imitating Warning Signal. No sign shall display intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or on police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words "stop," "danger," or other message or content in a manner than might mislead or confuse a driver. 
(b)  Private Signs on Public Property. Except as provided herein, no private sign is permitted within any street or highway right-of-way or on public property. No sign shall be placed so it will cause danger, either by obscuring a view, or otherwise. 
(c)  Flashing/Motion Signs. No signs that flash, move, twirl, blink, rotate, revolve, are animated or have moving parts shall be permitted. No signs containing reflective elements that cause excessive sparkle in the sunlight or containing luminous paint which glows in the dark shall be permitted. 
(d)  Obstructions. No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, window, door or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall be affixed to a fire escape, or interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
(e)  Attached and Painted Signs. Signs shall not be painted on or attached to trees, vegetation, fence posts, utility poles, rocks or other natural features. 
(f)  Obscene Signs. Obscene signs are prohibited. 
(g)  Illuminated Portable Signs. Illuminated portable signs which are not permanently attached to a building or land are prohibited. 
(h)  Freestanding Box Cabinets. Box cabinets, whether illuminated or non-illuminated, are prohibited unless attached to the wall of a building or permanent sign structure. 
(i)  Signs on the Property of Another. No sign shall be posted or placed on any property belonging to another without the written consent of the property owner of record. 
(j)  Signs near Traffic Lights. No red, green, or yellow illuminated sign shall be permitted within 300 feet of any traffic light. 
(k)  Roof Signs and Above Roof Signs. Roof signs, including signs mounted, painted or adhered on roofs, shall not be permitted. 
(l)  Display of Nudity. Signs displaying nudity or specified anatomical areas are prohibited. 
(m)  Bench Signs. Signs painted on or affixed to benches, other than those signs identifying the transit company or its route schedule, shall not be permitted. 
(n)  Signs that emit sound, vapor, smoke, odor, particles, or gaseous matter shall not be permitted. 
(o)  Any sign that is not specifically described or enumerated as permitted within the specific zoning district as provided in this Article is prohibited. 
17.8 - Sign types and standards. 
The following sign standards apply to all zoning districts except as specified elsewhere in this Article: 
(a)  Pole Signs. Pole signs shall not extend over a public right-of-way. If permitted, any pole signs abutting the right-of-way line shall have the display area ten feet or more above ground level measured from the grade at the right-of-way line. Signs with any portion of the display area less than ten feet above ground level shall be setback from the right-of-way line in accordance with Section 17.12. If the location of the sign structure is below the grade of the road, the height of the sign shall be measured from the nearest adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Ground Signs. Ground signs less than three feet in height shall be setback a minimum of three feet from the right-of-way line. Otherwise, such signs shall be setback from the right-of-way line in accordance with Section 17.12. 
(c)  Wall Signs and Flush Mounted Canopy Signs. Wall signs and flush mounted canopy signs (including signs attached flat against the wall or canopy and painted signs) shall be securely fastened by metal supports to the building surface. These signs may project from the building up to 12 inches; however, if the sign projects more than four inches from the building surface, the sign shall maintain a clear height of eight feet above ground level. Wall signs may not extend more than four feet above the wall. 
(d)  Hanging Canopy Signs. Hanging canopy signs shall not exceed six square feet in size and the lowest part of the sign shall not be less than eight feet above the ground. 
(e)  Window Signs. Each ground level business having glass directly orientated to a public street may use all of that glass area as one allowable sign, but no single window shall be covered more than 25 percent with copy or text. Window signs on or above the second floor are prohibited except when a business has no ground floor frontage. 
17.9 - General sign regulations. 
17.9.1  Sign Area. Sign area shall include both the display area and the area of the structure including base, posts, or other means of support; sign area shall be computed using the largest dimension of sign width and height. The display area shall include message and content, together with any background, open or enclosed which is part of the display itself, and shall be computed as follows for wall and double-faced signs: 
(a)  Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. 
(b)  Double-Faced Signs. In computing display area of a double-faced sign, if both faces are identical, only one side shall be considered. For "V" type sign structures, if the interior angle exceeds 60 degrees horizontally, the square footage of both sign faces shall be added in calculating display area. 
(c)  Wall Signs. The display area shall be the smallest rectangle that encompasses all of the message and content. 
17.9.2  Sign Height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the average ground level beneath the sign to its highest point. The ground level shall be the lower of the ground level existing at the time of construction or the ground level existing prior to construction and any earth disturbance at the site. The ground level existing prior to construction shall be established by a reliable source, including without limitation, existing topographic maps, aerial photographs, photographs of the site, or affidavits of people who are personally familiar with the site. No person shall artificially increase the maximum height of a sign by altering the grade at the base of the sign. 
17.9.3  Construction and Maintenance. Sign construction shall comply with applicable building and electrical codes as adopted by the City. A sign and all of its supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be constructed of durable materials and kept in good repair. Unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, exposed materials shall be given a protective coating as reasonably necessary. The area immediately surrounding all freestanding signs shall be maintained free of high weeds, grass and debris. Any sign or portion thereof that is declared to be unsafe or dangerous by the Zoning Administrator shall be restored to a safe condition at the owner's expense, provided that the requirements of this Article are met. 
17.9.4  Sign Illumination Standards. The following standards shall apply to the illuminated signs: 
(a)  Traffic Control. No sign illumination device shall resemble an official traffic control or warning sign, nor shall it hide from view or distract from any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(b)  Hazards. Sign illumination devices shall be placed, filtered, and shielded so direct rays will not be cast into the eyes of drivers or pedestrians. 
(c)  Light Pollution. Sign illumination shall not light adjacent properties and roadways. No illuminated signs are permitted within 50 feet of a residential district. The level of lighting shall not exceed one-half foot-candles at any residential property line or one foot-candles at any non-residential property line. 
(d)  Neon Tubes. No sign that has exposed neon tubes or other exposed tubes containing luminescent gas shall be displayed outside of a building. 
(e)  Exposed Wires. No sign may have exposed electrical wires. 
(f)  Security Lights. Lighting for the sole purpose of enhancing security is permitted in all zoning districts. Security lights shall not be directed toward motorists or any adjacent residential property. 
(g)  Types of sign illumination: 
(1)  Indirect Illumination. Indirect illumination of signs is permitted in any zoning district provided that such signs have concealed wiring and controls; 
(2)  Direct Illumination. Direct illumination of signs is limited to Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. 
17.10 - Message substitution. 
Subject to the property owner's consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly permitted or allowed noncommercial message; provided, that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision shall prevail over any more specific provision to the contrary within this Article. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, nor does it affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted. 
17.11 - Removal of obsolete signs. 
Any obsolete sign or sign structure shall be removed by the property owner within 30 days after the property owner's receipt of a written notice from the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator's notice shall be sent to the property owner at his last known address, certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested. This notice shall be sent only to property owners that have ceased business operations for a period in excess of 90 days. If the sign is not removed within 30 days after the property owner's receipt of written notice, the City will remove the sign and assess the cost of removal to the owner, in the same manner as City property taxes. 
17.12 - Signs permitted in specific zoning districts. 
Except as otherwise provided for under this Article, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district shall be prohibited in that district. Tables 17.12.A, 17.12.B, 17.12.C, and 17.12.D delineate types of signs allowed upon issuance of a sign permit. The tables appended hereto provide a summary of information regarding restrictions on signs as permitted in zoning districts within the City, including size and dimension regulations. The information contained in the following tables supplements, but does not serve to supersede the detailed text of this Article. To the extent any direct conflict arises between the detailed provisions of this Article and those of the appended tables, the text of this Article as set out shall control. 

 

 

 

 
17.12.1  Signs Permitted in Specific Zoning Districts. The following signs are permitted in addition to those otherwise permitted under Tables 17.12.A, 17.12.B, 17.12.C and 17.12.D: 
(a)  Informational—Directory: In Commercial and Industrial Districts, one on-premises, non-illuminated sign per business, either wall or freestanding, shall be permitted where a lot contains two or more principal buildings and/or a building containing multiple businesses. Each sign shall not exceed five feet in height and a 24 square foot display area. 
(b)  Directional—Pedestrian and Passenger Vehicular Traffic: In Commercial and Industrial Districts, four on-premises, directional signs per business designed to establish safe and convenient ingress, egress and internal circulation for traffic and parking. Each sign shall not exceed three feet in height and a four square foot display area. 
(c)  Directional—Vehicular Traffic: In Commercial and Industrial Districts, on-premises signs to provide safe and convenient access and internal circulation for traffic and parking for establishments whose primary patrons include trucks, recreational vehicles, and heavy equipment are permitted. Each business establishment shall be allowed no more than four signs which shall meet the specifications set forth in subsection 17.12.1(b) above and shall be allowed two additional signs which shall not exceed six feet in height and a 12 square foot display area. The additional signs must be utilized in areas where the traffic is principally trucks, not passenger vehicles. 
(d)  Special Purpose—Fuel: In Commercial and Industrial Districts, one on-premises sign for a business whose primary business is fuel sales. Said sign shall not exceed a 48 square foot display area and shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(e)  Special Purpose—Drive-Thru Menu Board and Order Station: In Commercial and Industrial Districts, one on-premises sign per business for a drive-in or drive-thru restaurant business for menu ordering. Said sign shall not exceed seven feet in height and shall not exceed a 50 square foot display area. 
(f)  Special Purpose—Scales: In Industrial Districts, one on-premises, non-illuminated sign for a business whose primary function includes weighing trucks of any type, for the purpose of giving directions to weight scales on the property. Said sign shall not exceed a display area of two feet by eight feet, and the structure supporting said sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height nor width. 
17.13 - Non-conforming signs. 
17.13.1  Intent. It is the intent of this Article to allow the continuance of signs that exist as of the effective date of this Ordinance which do not conform to this Article, but not to encourage their survival. Any sign or portion thereof that exists at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance but does not conform to the requirements of this Article may not be enlarged, modified, or expanded. Basic routine maintenance on non-conforming signs is permitted. 
17.13.2  Changes to Non-Conforming Signs. Any change in a non-conforming sign or portion thereof is subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Improvements and Repair. No non-conforming sign or portion thereof shall be improved or repaired in an amount exceeding 75 percent of the replacement cost of the sign and sign structure. Replacement cost is the cost to build an identical non-conforming sign or portion thereof; 
(b)  Abandonment. A sign or portion thereof rendered non-conforming due to the adoption of this Ordinance, which is unused for a continuous period of one year, shall not be re-established. Once abandoned, any future use of the sign or sign structure shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Article. 
17.13.3  Signs for Non-Conforming Uses. Any non-conforming use, which would be entitled to a sign if it were conforming, shall be permitted to erect the maximum amount of allowable signage in the zoning district in which the use is located. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - CONDITIONAL USES 

18.1 - Conditional use permits. 
Some zoning districts permit certain conditional uses only upon approval of the City Council. These uses are identified in this Ordinance and the granting of a Conditional Use does not constitute a permanent change in zoning or use. The Conditional Use may be forfeited if it does not meet the criteria provided in this Article. Generally, a Conditional Use shall be compatible with the applicable zoning district under special conditions. 
The developer or owner desiring to obtain a Conditional Use permit must have at least a 51 percent ownership interest in the subject property or be the duly authorized agent of such a person, possessing notarized authorization in writing, under the owner's signature. The Commission or the City Council may also propose a Conditional Use. 
The Commission may, after a public hearing, recommend approval or denial of a Conditional Use permit. However, only the City Council has the authority to approve a Conditional Use application. A Conditional Use shall be authorized by a Conditional Use Permit. 
18.2 - Procedure. 
The procedures for obtaining a Conditional Use Permit shall be as follows: 
(a)  Application: The Conditional Use application and application fee as set by the City shall be filed with the City Clerk and forwarded to the Building Inspector for review. If an applicant for a Conditional Use Permit maintains a condition that is in violation of this Ordinance at the time of application, then the Building Inspector shall be prohibited from reviewing and/or processing the application until the applicant ceases the violation of this Ordinance. The application shall be accompanied by a plat of the lot drawn to an accurate scale and a sketch showing the proposed uses of land and buildings, parking, loading, building line setbacks and such other information as may be required for review and decision. 
(b)  Notice and Public Hearing Required: When an application for a Conditional Use is filed, it shall be first considered by the Commission. The Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the conditional use application to the City Council. The notice and public hearing procedures will follow the provisions set forth in Section 3.4. The Zoning Administrator shall post a sign at least two feet by three feet in size, in a conspicuous place on the property, at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the scheduled Commission public hearing on the application. The sign shall set forth the subject matter of the hearing and provide the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
18.3 - Commission's consideration of use effect. 
The Commission shall make a determination regarding the effect of a Conditional Use on the character of the neighborhood or area in which it is proposed. It will consider the following guidelines in making any Conditional Use permit determinations: 
(a)  The effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets; 
(b)  The location of off-street parking facilities; 
(c)  The number, size and type of signs proposed for the site; 
(d)  The size and location of open space; 
(e)  The hours and manner of operation of the proposed use; 
(f)  The outdoor lighting requirements; 
(g)  The ingress and egress to/from the lot; and 
(h)  The compatibility of the proposed use with the surrounding land uses. 
18.4 - Conditional use restrictions. 
In accordance with the Conditional Use guidelines provided in Section 18.3 above, applicable zoning district regulations and where deemed necessary by the Commission to permit the proposed use to be in harmony with existing development and other matters essential to the public interest, health, safety and welfare, the Commission may require, as part of its approval, certain performance or design considerations including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Planted or screen buffers to reduce adverse or potentially adverse effects on adjoining properties; 
(b)  The location, design, or limitation of street access ways, parking areas, and loading docks; 
(c)  The re-arrangement of structures on the development site; 
(d)  Restrictions on maximum building height; 
(e)  Increases in minimum requirements for lot size and building line setbacks, but not a reduction of these requirements; 
(f)  Limitations of the hours of business operation when it can be shown that proposed operational times would cause an adverse effect on adjoining existing uses; 
(g)  Specified distances from existing residential, public or institutional developments. 
In no case, however, shall the Commission exempt any Conditional Use from meeting the minimum lot size and building requirements of this Ordinance. 
18.5 - Additional conditions and development standards. 
The Commission may recommend and the City Council may impose any additional conditions and development standards, along with the grant of the Conditional Use, as may be necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of surrounding landowners, neighborhoods and workers. 
18.6 - Issuance of conditional use permit. 
The Commission shall make a written recommendation for approval, approval with restrictions, or denial of the Conditional Use within 45 days of the filing of the application. The written recommendation shall explain the reason for the recommendation of approval or denial of the Conditional Use Permit. The City Council is not bound by the recommendation of the Commission, and after consideration of the Commission's written recommendation, the City Council may grant, grant with restrictions, or deny the application for the Conditional Use. 
The Building Inspector shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Conditional Use permit and for determining whether or not a Building Permit is to be issued. If the Building Inspector finds that any restrictions upon which a Conditional Use was granted are not being complied with, the Building Inspector may suspend the permit for the Conditional Use until such time the applicant brings the Conditional Use into compliance with the restrictions imposed by the Commission and/or City Council. During any period in which a Conditional Use permit is suspended, the owner or developer shall only conduct work which is necessary to bring the Conditional Use into compliance with the restrictions or conditions imposed by the City Council. 
18.7 - Time limit for conditional use review. 
All applications for a Conditional Use permit shall be decided by the City Council at the next regular City Council meeting after City Council receives written recommendation from the Commission. This time may be extended where the applicant agrees in writing to a waiver of this provision. Within a reasonable time following the meeting, the applicant shall be provided with a written notice either approving or granting, granting with restrictions or denying the Conditional Use. The written notice of Conditional Use denial shall include a statement of the reasons for denial. 
18.8 - List of conditional uses. 
Conditional Uses of land and structures include the following uses as determined upon review and recommendation of the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Article. All such Conditional Uses require the approval of the City Council and the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of this Article and Article 8 - Table of Permitted Uses. 
18.8.1  Arenas, Auditoriums or Stadiums. Arenas, Auditoriums or Stadiums may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  Such use shall not draw vehicular traffic to and over local streets in surrounding residential areas; 
(b)  Adequate space at the vehicular entrance and sufficient vehicular entrances and exits shall be provide to prevent traffic congestion; 
(c)  Vehicular entrances and exits for such use shall be provided separately and shall be located not less than 50 feet apart; 
(d)  No building or structure shall be located less than fifty feet (50 ft.) from any lot line; 
(e)  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required by Article 19. 
18.8.2  Child Care Centers. Child Care Centers may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Residential Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  The Building Inspector and the City Fire Chief approve the building for use as a child care center. The State Fire Marshall shall approve the building if the building is to be used for the care of more than six children; 
(b)  The use will not, in the opinion of the City Council, constitute a hazard or nuisance because of increased traffic conditions, number of children being cared for, noise, or types of physical activities which will be allowed on the lot; 
(c)  All outdoor play areas shall be fenced. All fences shall be a minimum of four feet in height, maintained properly and closed with child safety locks approved by the Building Inspector. 
18.8.3  Churches and Fraternal Organizations. Churches and Fraternal Organization may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Residential Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  Building line setbacks from abutting street right-of-ways shall be at least 50 feet from side lot lines and 25 feet from rear lot lines; 
(b)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by Article 19. 
18.8.4  Government Buildings. Government Buildings may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Residential Zoning Districts. 
18.8.5  Historical Exhibits. Historical Exhibits may be permitted as a Conditional Use subject to the provisions of Section 18.3 and 18.4. 
18.8.6  Hospitals. Hospitals may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Residential Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  Such use shall not have a detrimental effect on the value of surrounding properties; 
(b)  No building or structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any abutting street right-of-way and 25 feet to any side or rear property line; 
(c)  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required by Article 19. 
18.8.7  Music Studios. Music Studios may be permitted as a Conditional Use provided that the sound from such studio would not be a nuisance to surrounding properties, particularly residential and institutional uses. 
18.8.8  Nursing Homes. Nursing Homes may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Residential Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  No building or structure shall be located less than 50 feet from any abutting street right-of-way and 25 feet from any side and rear property lines; 
(b)  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required by Article 19. 
18.8.9  Public Utility Uses. Public Utility Uses may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Residential Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  Uses include water or sewage pumping stations, electric substations, gas metering and regulating stations, sewage disposal and water treatment plants, telephone exchanges or other such communications equipment structures; 
(b)  Such uses shall be permitted in any district in any location which the City Council deems reasonably necessary for the public convenience and welfare. 
18.8.10  Bed and Breakfast Inns. Bed and Breakfast Inns may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Residential Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  No building or structure shall be located less than 50 feet from any abutting street right-of-way and 25 feet from any side and rear property lines; 
(b)  Product displays, parked vehicles, signs and other obstructions which impair visibility to and from access driveways shall be prohibited; 
(c)  No light created by the establishment shall shine directly onto a neighboring residential property; 
(d)  Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required by Article 19. 
18.8.11  School and Educational Facilities. Public or Private Schools and Educational Facilities may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Residential Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  No building or structure shall be located less than 50 feet from any abutting street right-of-way and 25 feet from any side and rear property lines; 
(b)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by Article 19. 
18.8.12  Community Swimming Pools. Community Swimming Pools may be permitted as a Conditional Use in Zoning Districts provided that: 
(a)  No pool or accessory facilities shall be located closer than 60 feet to any lot line of a Residential Zoning District. In a Commercial and Industrial Zoning District, no pool or accessory facilities shall be located closer than 50 feet to any lot line; 
(b)  A minimum of ten off-street parking spaces shall be provided; 
(c)  The Jefferson County Board of Health shall certify the adequacy of the location and the proposed capacities of toilet, shower and dressing facilities; 
(d)  The owner or builder has shown the ability to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 31-45-1, et seq., as amended. 
ARTICLE XIX. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

19.1 - Off-street parking. 
Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot, tract or parcel on which any permitted use or special exception is established in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
19.1.1  General Requirements. For the purpose of this Article, the following general requirements are specified: 
(a)  All off-street automobile storage or parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or land. With exception of single-family and two-family dwellings fronting on a minor or local street, no required off-street parking facilities shall be arranged so as to require backing from the space directly onto a public street. 
(b)  General off-street parking plans shall be submitted as part of proposed site plans. Such plans shall show the proposed layout of all parking areas, the total number of off-street parking spaces to be provided and the dimensions of the typical individual parking space. Off-street parking plans, including driveways and curb cuts, shall be approved by the Commission. 
(c)  Individual parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of ten feet in width and 20 feet in length unless off-street parking is to be provided in common parking bays or lots. Common parking bays or lots shall meet minimum dimensional requirements. 
(d)  All common off-street parking bays shall be graded to provide adequate drainage and shall be paved with an all-weather material or equivalent surface subject to Commission approval. 
(e)  Along those lot lines of a non-residential parking area which abuts a residential district, a solid, artificial or compact, opaque screen of no less than five feet in height shall be erected or planted. The screen shall begin five feet from the right-of-way line of a public street and continue for the entire length of the property line abutting a Residential Zoning District. All screens shall be properly maintained by the property owner. 
(f)  No curb cuts shall be allowed within 50 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way line of two public streets. Except in Residential Zoning Districts, no curb cut shall be allowed within 25 feet of any other curb cut on or off-site. 
(g)  Any light used to illuminate required parking areas shall be arranged so that the light is reflected away from adjacent residential properties. 
(h)  No sign (permanent or temporary), structure, equipment, light standard or screening material shall be placed so as to inhibit the orderly use of a parking area or in a manner which reduces the number of usable parking spaces. No sign, light standard or screening material shall be placed so that it obstructs visibility for drivers or pedestrians. No light standard shall be placed closer than ten feet (10 ft.) from any property line. 
(i)  All off-street parking spaces located in parking lots or in common parking bays shall be marked by durable painted stripes designating no less than the required minimum parking space area. 
(j)  No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with off-street parking areas except short-term minor repair on vehicles. 
(k)  Parking areas shall include handicap accessible spaces in an appropriate number based on the type of use of the property. 
(l)  If the required off-street parking area cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot, tract or parcel on which the principal use is conducted, the applicant may be permitted to provide such space on other off-street property, provided such space is located within three hundred feet (300 ft.) of the lot line of such principal use. Such parking area may consist of parking provided for other uses provided that the utilization of the parking area by the proposed activity does not conflict with the activities associated with the primary use and that the applicant obtains written authorization to use the parking facility on a continuing basis. 
19.1.2  Parking Space Requirements for all Zoning Districts. Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a public street and shall be equal to or greater than the minimum requirements for the specific use set forth in Table 19.1.A. 

 
19.1.3  Uses Not Specified. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in Table 19.1.A the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be determined by the Commission. Such determination shall be based upon the requirements set forth for the most comparable use specified in Table 19.1 .A. 
19.1.4  Reduction of Minimum Parking Spaces. The Commission may, at its discretion, reduce the minimum number of parking spaces required by Table 19.1.A for a specific land use provided that sufficient evidence is presented justifying the need for reduction in the parking requirements and every effort has been made to provide off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of this Article 19. 
19.2 - Off-street loading. 
Off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided as hereinafter required by this Section. 
19.2.1  General Requirements. For the purpose of this Section, the following general requirements are specified: 
(a)  The term "off-street loading and unloading space" shall mean an area having the minimum dimensions of 14 feet in height, 12 feet in width, and 50 feet in length plus an adequate maneuvering area to facilitate entry into and exit from the space. The Commission may, upon receiving sufficient information that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by small trucks or vans, reduce the minimum dimension requirements accordingly. 
(b)  Each required off-street loading space shall have direct access to a street or have a driveway which provides satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. The width of the access way shall be at least 25 feet wide but not greater than 35 feet wide and shall have a minimum radius at the curb line of 15 feet. 
(c)  Each required off-street loading space shall be so designed as to avoid interference with other vehicular or rail access, use of public streets or other public transport systems. 
(d)  All off-street loading facilities, including spaces and maneuvering area, shall be adequately drained and paved with an all-weather material or equivalent surface subject to the approval of the Commission. 
(e)  Along those lot lines of the loading area which abut a residential district, a solid artificial or a compact natural screen of no less than five feet in height shall be erected or planted and thereafter shall be properly maintained by the property owner. 
(f)  Any light used to illuminate required off-street loading areas shall be arranged so that the light is reflected away from adjacent properties. No light standard shall be erected within ten feet of a property line. 
(g)  All off-street loading areas and their respective maneuvering areas shall be setback not less than 25 feet from a public right-of-way. 
19.2.2  Loading Space Requirements for all Zoning Districts. Off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided with vehicular access to a public street and shall be equal to or greater than the minimum requirements for the specific use set forth in Table 19.2.A. 

 
19.2.3  Uses Not Specified. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in Table 19.2.A and where there is a need for loading and unloading space, the requirements for off-street loading facilities shall be determined by the Commission. Such determination shall be based upon the requirements set forth for the most comparable use specified in Table 19.2.A. 
19.2.4  Reduction of Minimum Loading Spaces. The Commission may, at its discretion, reduce the minimum number of loading spaces required by Table 19.2.A for a specific land use provided that sufficient evidence is presented justifying the need for reduction in the requirements and every effort has been made to provide off-street loading space in accordance with the provisions of this Article 19. 
19.3 - Nonconforming parking and loading spaces. 
Any commercial, industrial or residential building existing on the effective date of this Ordinance may be reconstructed, remodeled or enlarged without increasing the existing off-street parking and loading spaces provided that reconstruction, remodeling or enlargement does not increase the existing gross floor area of the building by more than ten percent. Additional off-street parking must be provided for that portion of the additional floor area in the excess of ten percent in accordance with requirements set forth herein. 
ARTICLE XX. - AMENDMENTS AND VARIANCES 

20.1 - Amendments; generally. 
The City Council may from time to time, after receiving a final report thereon from the Commission and after a public hearing is held as required by law, amend, supplement or change these regulations or the boundaries of the zoning districts subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  No amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been initiated by either the City Council, the Commission, property owner(s), or an individual who has the owner(s)' power of attorney authorizing him/her to act, or a request signed by the property owners who own not less than 60 percent of the affected land. The aforementioned parties may request that the Zoning Map be amended from an existing zoning district to another as it applies to an individual property or they may propose an amendment to the text of this Ordinance under the provisions of this Article 20. 
(b)  As used in this Article, the term "amendment" shall mean a change to the Zoning Map, a zoning change, or other changes to the text of this Ordinance unless otherwise indicated. All applications for amendment must first be reviewed by the Commission, who will then make a written recommendation to the City Council. The power to approve and enact an amendment to this Ordinance rests solely within the legislative discretion of the City Council. 
20.1.1  Procedure. 
(a)  No application will be accepted from any person regarding any property that is in violation of this Zoning Ordinance, the City Code of Ordinances, or the laws of the State of Georgia. If the property which is the subject of an amendment or other action by the Commission, is, at the time of application, found to be in violation of this Ordinance, the City Code of Ordinances, or the laws of the State of Georgia, then the Zoning Administrator will not accept and/or process any application until the applicant voluntarily removes or eliminates the violation or ceases to be in violation. The applicant must then notify the Zoning Administrator that he is no longer in violation and obtain a written release from the Zoning Administrator as to the violation. Once released, the Zoning Administrator will then accept the application for amendment of this Ordinance. 
(b)  All proposed amendments to this Ordinance shall be initiated by submitting an application to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City. A standard fee shall be paid with the application in an amount of the estimated publication costs for the required public hearing notice. The required information will then be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator who will then transmit it to the Commission for its consideration. The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed amendment and make written recommendations to the Commission. 
(c)  All amendments proposed to this Ordinance must first be reviewed by the Commission. The Commission will review and analyze the proposed amendment and determine if it meets the standards enumerated in Section 20.2 of this Ordinance, as well as other applicable Ordinances of the City. 
(d)  The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment. 
(e)  The Commission shall make a recommendation as to the advisability of adoption of any proposed zoning amendment. The determination shall be in writing addressed to the City Council and shall clearly state the Commission's recommendations. Further, the Commission's recommendations shall provide an evaluation of the factors set forth in Section 20.2 and describe how the Commission's recommendations are considered to be consistent with the exercise of zoning power set forth in the Section 20.2. The Commission shall forward a copy of its written recommendation to the City Council within 45 days from the date on which the complete application for the proposed amendment was received by the City Clerk. If the Commission fails to forward its recommendation to the City Council within the 45 day time period, the amendment shall be considered recommended for approval. 
(f)  The Commission's role in any zoning amendment decision shall be advisory only. 
20.2 - Zoning standards. 
The exercise of the zoning power of the City shall constitute an effort to balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right of property owners to the unrestricted use of their property. The following factors shall be considered by the Commission when reviewing and making its written recommendation and by the City Council when making a decision whether to approve or deny the requested amendment. These factors are determined to be relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of the property: 
(a)  Whether the proposed zoning would allow a use that is generally suitable for the property compared to other possible uses and the uses and zoning of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(b)  Whether the proposed zoning would adversely affect the economic value or the uses of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(c)  Whether the property to be affected by the proposed zoning can be used as currently zoned; 
(d)  Whether the proposed zoning, if adopted, would result in a use which would or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, schools, sewers, water resources, police and fire protection or other utilities. A public hearing shall be conducted at the time and place specified by the Commission and as set forth in the public notice described in Section 20.3. The purpose of such hearing shall be to present to the public the proposed zoning amendment and to receive comments thereon from the public. The Commission shall consider the proceedings and comments of such hearing on the proposed zoning amendment in making a recommendation on whether to approve or deny the application. The Commission shall prescribe the rules of order for its deliberations on matters with which it is charged under this Ordinance, and said rules of order shall be consistent with the general requirements and purposes set forth in this Ordinance and other general laws of the State of Georgia concerning conduct of proceedings of public commissions, bodies and governmental units; 
(e)  Whether there are other conditions or transitional patterns affecting the use and development of the property sought to be rezoned, if applicable, which give ground for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment; 
(f)  Whether the proposed zoning is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan insofar as the plan is current in its application to the specific property that is the subject of the zoning decision; 
(g)  Whether the proposed zoning or use will adversely affect a known archaeological, historical, cultural or environmental resource, such as water or air quality, ground water recharge areas, drainage areas, soil erosion and sedimentation and flooding; 
(h)  Whether the proposed zoning improves the overall zoning scheme and helps carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. 
The City shall consider any proposed amendment properly initiated in light of the factors set forth in Section 20.2. In evaluating the factors set forth in Section 20.2, it shall be the policy of the City to exercise its zoning power in conformity with the policy and intent of the Comprehensive Plan insofar as the plan is current in its application to the specific property that is the subject of the proposed amendment. It is further the policy of the City to exercise zoning power for purposes of assuring the compatibility of use of adjacent and nearby properties and the preservation of the economic value of adjacent and nearby properties while enabling a reasonable use of all property. 
20.3 - Public notice. 
Public notice of the hearing on a proposed amendment to this Ordinance shall be given as hereinafter set forth: 
(a)  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date set by the Commission for the public hearing, a written notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City setting forth the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing; 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of Section 20.3(a) above, if the proposed amendment calls for a decision concerning the rezoning of property and the proposed amendment is initiated by a person other than the Commission or the City Council: 
(1)  The published notice shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property (if applicable) and the proposed zoning classification of the property; 
(2)  A sign at least two feet by three feet in size shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property sought to be rezoned at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. It shall set forth the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences limiting the effectiveness of notice by a sign posted on the property shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. Said sign shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC 
A petition has been filed requesting that this property be changed from (insert present zoning district) to (insert zoning district requested). A public hearing will be held at (insert place) on (date) at (time). 
All those having an interest in the petition shall be present. 
(Property Owner)  (Address) 
20.4 - Conduct of zoning amendment hearings. 
Public Hearings for zoning amendments shall be conducted in accordance with Section 3.4. 
20.5 - Official action by the City Council. 
Consideration of any proposed zoning amendment by the City Council shall be as follows: 
(a)  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Commission, the City Council may approve, disapprove, or table the proposed zoning amendment. If consideration of the proposed zoning amendment is tabled, it shall be re-considered by the City Council at a future meeting; 
(b)  Within a reasonable time following the City Council meeting, the applicant shall be provided with a written notice either approving or disapproving the zoning amendment. A written notice of denial shall include a statement of the reasons for denial. 
20.5.1  Appeal from Decision of the City Council. Appeals from the decision of the City Council regarding the approval or disapproval of a zoning amendment shall be made in accordance with Section 23.14 of this Ordinance. 
20.5.2  Withdrawal of Application. Any application for an amendment may be withdrawn prior to Commission decision by delivering written notice to the City Clerk. In the event notice of the public hearing has been published prior to withdrawal, publication costs will not be refunded to the applicant. 
20.5.3  Limitation on Re-Application. If the City Council shall take official action denying a proposed zoning amendment which seeks to rezone property, the same property may not be considered again for rezoning until the expiration of 12 months from the date of the official action of the City Council's final decision. However, on receipt of written documentation by the original party requesting the zoning change that conditions have changed substantially within the City or area sufficient to justify the re-consideration of a zoning change and an earlier review of the proposed change, the City Council may waive the mandatory limitation period and authorize the re-consideration of the proposed change as though it were a newly requested zoning change. In such instances, the request for a zoning change shall comply fully with the requirements of this Article. 
20.5.4  Withdrawal Without Prejudice. Prior to the Commission's decision on the appropriateness of a requested zoning change and before it shall have submitted its recommendation to the City Council, the party requesting the change in zoning may withdraw his/her application. In such case, the application shall be considered as though it were never proposed except that its withdrawal and any considerations shall be entered into the minutes of the Commission. Withdrawn applications therefore may be exempted from the provisions of Section 20.5.3 and re-submitted for formal action by the Commission and the City Council as though it were a new request. 
20.6 - Variances. 
20.6.1  Procedure. 
(a)  All proposed variance requests shall be initiated by submitting a Variance application and an application fee as set by the City Council to the City Clerk. The Variance application shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator for review. The application shall be accompanied by a sketch of the lot drawn to an accurate scale showing structures, proposed structures, setback requirements and other pertinent information. Once the application has been reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, the application shall be forwarded to the Commission for its consideration. 
(b)  Within a reasonable time after receiving an application for a Variance and before making its decision, the Commission shall schedule and conduct a public hearing as provided in Section 3.4. 
(c)  The Commission shall hear and decide applications for Variances in accordance with the development requirements of this Ordinance, but only in individual cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. This includes exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property which at the time of adoption of this Ordinance was a lot or plat of record; or where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of a piece of property, the strict application of the development requirements of this Ordinance would result in practical difficulties to or undue hardship upon the owner of such property. In no event shall the Commission be authorized to grant a density Variance or a Variance to permit a use in a zoning district in which the use is prohibited. Variances for building code, plumbing code, electrical code or life safety code requirements are prohibited. 
20.6.2  Factors and Conditions to be Considered. 
(a)  The following factors shall be considered by the Commission when making a decision whether to approve or deny a Variance: 
(1)  Whether the proposed Variance would allow a use that is generally suitable for the property; 
(2)  Whether the proposed Variance would adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; 
(3)  Whether the property subject of the proposed Variance can be used applying existing development standards; 
(4)  Whether special circumstances or conditions exist to justify the grant of the Variance. 
(b)  No Variance shall be authorized unless the Commission finds that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The special circumstances or conditions applying to the building or land in question are peculiar to such premises and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity; 
(2)  The granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a property right and not merely to serve as a convenience to the applicant; 
(3)  The condition from which relief of a Variance is sought did not result from action by the applicant; 
(4)  The authorization of the Variance will not: impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property; unreasonably increase traffic congestion in public streets; increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety; unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within surrounding areas; or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, or general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
20.6.3  Burden on Applicant. During the Commission's review of an application for a Variance, the applicant has the burden of showing that the Variance should be granted. 
20.6.4  Withdrawal of Application. Any application for a Variance may be withdrawn upon delivering written notice to the City Clerk. However, no application shall be withdrawn following the posting and publication of a hearing notice and prior to Commission action thereon without the affirmative vote of the Commission. In the event of withdrawal pursuant to this Section, publication costs will be not be refunded to the applicant. 
20.6.5  Approval of Application, Conditions. In granting a Variance, the Commission may impose thereon such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served and to provide adequately for the maintenance of the integrity and character of the zoning district in which such Variance is granted. 
20.6.6  Approval of Application, Guarantees. When necessary, the Commission may require guarantees, in such form as it deems proper, to insure that conditions designated in connection with a grant of a Variance are being or will be complied with. Where any condition under which a Variance has been granted appears to have been violated, the Commission may hold a public hearing thereon to determine whether or not the Variance granted shall be revoked. 
20.6.7  Grant or Denial of Variance. The Commission, when granting a Variance, may establish an expiration date for said Variance. The minutes of the Commission meeting shall state whether the Variance was granted or denied, and if granted, the minutes shall state the reasons for departure from the strict application of this Ordinance and any conditions under which the Variance was granted. The applicant shall be provided written notice of the Commission's decision concerning the Variance. Any Variance granted shall terminate automatically when the use ceases to be in full compliance with any conditions imposed by the Commission, when the use has been abandoned or when the building permit has expired. 
20.6.8  Approval of Application, Time Limitation. Upon approval of an application for a Variance, the applicant shall apply for a Certificate of Occupancy or building permit within 60 days after the Commission's decision unless a greater time is requested in the application and is authorized by the Commission. An applicant may be granted an emergency extension of 60 days on written request filed with the Commission before the expiration of the original 60-day period. Failure of the applicant to apply for the Certificate of Occupancy or building permit within the mandatory time period shall void the right to secure such permits except upon the filing of a new Variance application. 
20.6.9  Appeal of the Commission's Decision on Variance Application. Any person or persons, jointly or separately, aggrieved by a Variance application decision of the Commission may appeal to the City Council. All appeals from the decision of the Commission must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within 30 days of the Commission's decision. Failure of the applicant to file an appeal during this 30 day period will result in the forfeiture of the appeals process. 
ARTICLE XXI. - NONCONFORMING USES 

21.1 - Nonconforming uses of land and structures. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this Article to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights; however, this Article recognizes that the elimination of existing structures and uses that are not in conformity with this Ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses which would violate the purpose, intent and provisions of this Ordinance. A structure, building or use which was lawfully established before the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, and which does not conform to one or more of the requirements of this Ordinance, is a nonconformity. 
(b)  Continuation in perpetuity. A nonconforming use, building, or other structure may be continued in perpetuity, subject to the following conditions that the nonconforming use, building or structure not be: 
(1)  Changed to or replaced by another nonconforming use. 
(2)  Torn down and rebuilt as a nonconforming use or structure. 
(3)  Expanded or enlarged in any way. 
(4)  Reestablished, repaired, replaced or rebuilt after damage to the extent of 75 percent or more of its fair market value. This provision shall not apply to an owner-occupied dwelling or to a commercial building damaged by severe wind, storm, hurricane, tornado or other act of god. 
(5)  Reestablished after vacancy or discontinuance of operation for one (1) year. 
(c)  Maintenance and repairs. 
(1)  On a nonconforming structure, or portion thereof, which may contain a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 75 percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure, provided that the size existing when such structure became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
(2)  Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building, or part thereof, which is declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(d)  Nonconforming lots. A lot that was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this Ordinance which does not meet the minimum area, width or frontage requirements of this Ordinance, may be used as a building site, provided that access is provided directly from a public street or through a private easement, and provided that minimum building setbacks are not reduced more than 30 percent from the required minimum building setbacks set forth in this Ordinance; provided, however, that the minimum front-yard setback shall not be reduced to less than 30 feet from the front of the building to the centerline of the road. 
ARTICLE XXII. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

22.1 - Home occupations. 
A customary home occupation is a gainful occupation or profession conducted by members of a household residing on the premises and conducted entirely within the dwelling. Dwellings housing customary home occupations shall display no stock in trade outside the dwelling, and no alteration to any building shall indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purposes other than a residential unit, including permitted accessory buildings. 
(a)  Home Occupations are subject to the following: 
(1)  Such office or shop must be situated in the same dwelling as the home of the occupant; 
(2)  The residential character of the dwelling is not changed; 
(3)  There shall be not more than one assistant employed other than the immediate members of the family residing in the dwelling; 
(4)  The necessary functions of the home occupation shall not occupy over 20 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit; 
(5)  Before a Home Occupation shall be permitted, property owners within a 1,500 foot radius of the front door of the dwelling shall be notified at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the Commission; 
(6)  Before a Home Occupation shall be permitted, a determination shall be made regarding the effect of the proposed activity on traffic volume along adjoining streets. The occupation shall not substantially increase traffic volume in the neighborhood or surrounding area; 
(7)  Where special equipment is used, all electrical, plumbing, etc. must comply with applicable codes adopted by the City which relate to the use and operation of said equipment. A Home Occupation will not be approved until such time the applicant can demonstrate compliance with applicable codes; 
(8)  A Home Occupation may be denied by the Commission if in its judgment, such occupation will be hazardous or injurious to the welfare of the community; 
(9)  One nameplate or sign for each dwelling unit, excluding flashing or animated types, not exceeding five square feet in display area, indicating the name of the occupant and/or any permitted occupation may be permitted. 
(b)  The following Home Occupations, subject to the requirements of this Section, are permitted as Home Occupations: 
(1)  Barber shop and beauty shop (see also: (a)(3) above); 
(2)  Artist, dressmaker, seamstress, tailor and interior decorator; 
(3)  The professional office of an architect, accountant, lawyer or engineer; 
(4)  Teaching, including tutoring, musical instruction, or dancing, but limited to three pupils at a given time; 
(5)  Internet-based businesses having limited customer traffic; 
(6)  Any similar use which upon review by the Commission is deemed to be a Home Occupation by reason or acceptance as a Home Occupation in the community. 
22.2 - Satellite dish receiving stations. 
All Satellite Dish Antenna in excess of 48 inches in diameter and not roof mounted are subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Such antenna shall be located in the rear yard as defined in this Ordinance; and 
(b)  The height of the antenna and its related structure shall not exceed 15 feet above the ground when said antenna is in a position perpendicular to the ground; and the maximum diameter of any satellite dish shall not exceed 12 feet. 
22.3 - Laboratories, research, experimental or testing. 
Laboratories, Research, Experimental or Testing establishments are subject to the following: 
(a)  The activities to be conducted do not endanger the public health, safety or general welfare in the surrounding area as well as the community; 
(b)  Such establishment does not emit any obnoxious odors or fumes; 
(c)  Adequate steps are taken to prevent spillage or draining of contaminants, undilutable chemical or similar acids into the City sewerage systems or into any stream or river; 
(d)  Adequate steps are taken to dispose of solid wastes generated by the establishment. 
22.4 - Automobile service station/convenience stores that dispense gasoline. 
Automobile service stations and/or convenience stores that dispense gasoline are subject to the following: 
(a)  When such use abuts a Residential zone, school, public playground, church, hospital, public library or other similar use area, and is not effectively screened by a natural terrain feature, the use shall be screened adjacent to such Residential zone or other area by a solid wall or a solid fence not less than six feet and not more than eight feet in height, or with a planted buffer strip of trees, or shrubs which are at least four feet high at the time of planting and which can reasonably be expected to reach at least six feet in height within three years. All screening shall be properly maintained by the property owner. Such screening shall not be located closer than 20 feet to any public street right-of-way. Such screening shall not be required along a street frontage; 
(b)  Product displays, parked vehicles, signs and other obstructions which may impair visibility to or from station driveways shall be prohibited; 
(c)  When such a use occupies a corner lot, the ingress or egress driveways shall be located at least 35 feet from the intersection of the abutting street right-of-way lines, and such driveways shall not exceed 30 feet in width measured a point of ten feet from the street curb; provided that in no case shall the street right-of-way line be considered to be less than 30 feet from the street center line; 
(d)  Gasoline pumps or other service appliances are accessory to the Automobile Service Station or Convenience Stores that dispenses Gasoline; 
(e)  Gasoline pumps or other service appliances shall be located on the lot at least 25 feet from the street curb or 15 feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is greater. No such pump or appliance or operational component thereof shall be located closer to any side or rear property line than the required building line setback distance prescribed for the principal use in applicable zoning district; 
(f)  There shall be at least 30 feet between driveways on each street, and all driveways shall be perpendicular or no more than 45 degrees from perpendicular to the street curb; 
(g)  Light automobile repair work may be performed at an Automobile Service Station provided that no major repairs, painting operations or body work shall be permitted; 
(h)  Not more than two inoperable vehicles shall be stored on the premises unless stored entirely within an enclosed building; 
(i)  Except while receiving gasoline from pumps, no vehicle shall be parked closer than 25 feet from a street right-of-way; 
(j)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by Article 19. 
22.5 - Hotels/motels. 
Hotels and motels are subject to the following: 
(a)  The proposed lot shall have a minimum lot area of 800 square feet per guest unit; 
(b)  No building or structure shall be located less than 25 feet from an adjoining rear and side property line; 
(c)  No exterior display or advertising shall be displayed, except those signs permitted in accordance with Article 17; 
(d)  The following accessory uses may be permitted subject to all applicable regulations of this Ordinance: 
(1)  Swimming pools, but only for the use of registered guests; 
(2)  Newsstands for the convenience of guests; 
(e)  Each guest room or unit shall be provided with its own toilet and bath or shower; 
(f)  Vehicular entrances and exits for such use shall be provided separately and shall be located not less than 50 feet apart; 
(g)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required by Article 19. 
22.6 - Agricultural uses in residential districts. 
This Section is established with the intention that complimentary agricultural uses should be permitted within residential districts. It is recognized that agricultural uses are in many instances complimentary to primary residential uses, and make for a more pleasant and complete living environment. This Section is not designed to permit the pursuit of agriculture primarily for commercial purposes, but does not preclude the occasional sale of agricultural commodities produced as an activity incidental to the residential use of the land. 
22.6.1  Noncommercial/Agricultural Uses which are Permitted. The following uses are permitted in Residential Zoning Districts: 
(a)  The raising of garden crops, vineyard crops, fruits and plants incidental to the residential use of the land; 
(b)  Below grade storm shelters; 
(c)  Forestry and public parks. 
22.7 - Flood hazard areas. 
Certain areas of the City are identified as being subject to periodic inundation during periods of heavy rainfall and surface water runoff. Such inundation can possibly result in loss of life and/or property. Additionally, unrestricted development within such flood hazard areas can create health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, require extraordinary public expenditures for flood disaster relief, and impair the local tax base. All of these conditions can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the purpose of this Section is to lessen such hazards and losses by requiring special conditions prerequisite to development and alteration of land within designated flood hazard areas. 
22.7.1  Designation of Flood Hazard Areas. Areas defined as being subject to periodic inundation are hereby designated as Flood Hazard Areas. The limits of such areas are shown on the Flood Hazard Area Map of the City of Wrens. The Flood Hazard Area Map shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
22.7.2  Land Uses in Flood Hazard Areas and Building Permits. Flood Hazard Areas are not intended as separate zoning districts but a designation of areas subject to special restrictions. Such restrictions are therefore supplementary to the regulations of the zoning district(s) which the flood hazard areas overlap. Land uses permitted within flood hazard areas shall be allowed in accordance with the specific zoning district in which the land and/or structure is located. However, all building permits shall be approved by the Commission when the planned building site is located within a Flood Hazard Area. 
22.7.3  Development Standards and Guidelines. Special regulations applying to development or use of land and structures located within flood hazard areas are as follows: 
(a)  All structures shall be designed, constructed, and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the natural flow of water; 
(b)  Where sufficient space is available on a lot, all structures shall be located outside the limits of the flood hazard area; 
(c)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(d)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(e)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the system into flood waters; 
(f)  New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above base flood elevation; 
(g)  New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be flood-proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied; 
(h)  There shall be no filling of land or alteration of the water course within flood hazard areas unless said filling or alteration is approved in writing by the Army Corps of Engineers or other applicable government agency. 
22.7.4  Approval of Commission. No building and/or location permit shall be issued for the construction or modification of any building or structure or for any use within flood hazard areas until such plans for construction or use have been submitted to the Commission for approval. The Commission may require topographic data, engineering and other studies as needed to determine the effects of flooding on a proposed structure and/or the effect on the flow of water. The Commission may further require the applicant to submit reports or studies prepared by competent engineers or other technical professionals. 
22.7.5  Consideration of Effect. In deciding whether or not to approve a building permit for any structure or use of land within a flood hazard area, the Commission shall consider the following: 
(a)  The danger that materials may be swept into other lands injuring others; 
(b)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(c)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the owner; 
(d)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(e)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(f)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for vehicles. 
22.7.6  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. This Ordinance does not imply that property located outside designated flood hazard areas or uses located outside the designated flood hazard areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. 
The approval of a building permit for any structure or use located in a designated flood hazard area shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the City Council or the Commission, or by any officer or employee of the City of the practicality or safety of any structure or use proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, officer or employee for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
22.8 - Wetland protection district. 
22.8.1  Intent. The wetlands within the City are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the State of Georgia. Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filing, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. It is therefore necessary for the City to ensure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities that may adversely affect wetlands. The purpose of this district is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this district is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
22.8.2  Wetland Protection District. 
(a)  Wetland Protection District. This Section shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within the jurisdiction of the City. A Generalized Wetland Map, adopted as part of this Ordinance, shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands. The Generalized Wetland Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The Generalized Wetland Map shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(b)  Wetland Protection District Boundaries. The Generalized Wetland Map is a general reference document and the wetland areas indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the Generalized Wetland Map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdictional wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a permit will be required prior to any activity. The Generalized Wetland Map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified professional, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this Ordinance does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
22.8.3  Local Development Permits. 
(a)  Local Development Permit Requirements. No regulated activity will be allowed within a Wetland Protection District without written permission from the City in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and all other applicable regulations. All activities that are not identified within this Section shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development is located within 300 feet of a Wetland Protection District boundary, as determined by the City or an authorized designee using the Generalized Wetland Map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site and that a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following issuance of the Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission. 
(b)  Permitted and Prohibited Uses. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland to the extent that they are not prohibited by this Ordinance or other law including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein: 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided they do not effect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an additional Section 404 Permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The continued cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural Best Management Practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(7)  Temporary Emergency Permit: A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the City for the following reasons: 
(i)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures, or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to the City and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(ii)  Temporary water-level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. 
(iii)  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the provisions of this Section. 
(iv)  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and they preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(v)  The following uses shall be prohibited within a Wetland Protection District: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(c)  Site Plans. Applications for a local development permit within the Wetland Protection District shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or other approved scale with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings; 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries existing within the site. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant; 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet; 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body; 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet, and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent; 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials; 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(d)  Activities to Comply with Site Plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the City Council. The City may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purpose of this district. 
(e)  Subdivision Approval in the Wetland Protection District. Any application for subdivision approval shall include a Jurisdictional Determination approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present and that a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is required, subdivision approval will be issued only following issuance of the Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission. 
(f)  Application Filing Fee. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as set from time to time by the Mayor and City Council. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services relating to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determinations as deemed necessary by the City. 
(g)  Review Procedures. The local development permit application shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator or his designated appointee and will be reviewed within 60 days of receipt. The review period shall begin upon determination by the Zoning Administrator or designated appointee that the application submitted is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval or disapproval) by the Commission. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the Commission. 
(h)  Appeals. Decisions on local development permit applications made by the Commission may be appealed to the City Council. The appeal must be made within ten days of the decision rendered by the Commission. A public hearing shall be held for appeals. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper serving the City at least two weeks prior to the public hearing. The decision of City Council may be appealed to the Superior Court of Jefferson County, Georgia. 
(i)  Duration of Permit Validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the local development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire; 
(2)  If construction described in the local development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date that work ceased; 
(3)  Written notice of the expiration of the local development permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator. 
22.8.4  Monitoring and Enforcement. The City, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this Section and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the City deems necessary. 
(a)  All enforcement and monitoring activities conducted by the City that involve entrance to privately owned land shall be preceded by written notification to the landowner. Said notification shall be issued at least five days prior to the activities specified in the notification. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector shall have authority to: enforce Section 22.8 of this Ordinance; issue permits hereunder; address violations or threatened violations by issuance of violation notices and administrative orders; and pursue civil and criminal actions against the violator. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(c)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
(d)  The Zoning Administrator, at the direction of the Mayor and City Council, shall have authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of Section 22.8 of this Ordinance. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to the Superior Court of Jefferson County, Georgia. 
22.8.5  Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of Section 22.8 of this Ordinance may be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day in violation shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of Section 22.8 of this Ordinance, the violator may be required to demolish and/or remove the structure. 
(c)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of Section 22.8 of this Ordinance, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(d)  If the City discovers a violation of this Ordinance that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act, as amended, the City shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(e)  Suspension or revocation. The City may suspend or revoke a local development permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of work set forth in the permit. The City shall cause notice of revocation or suspension of a local development permit to be published in the local legal organ serving the City. 
22.8.6  Judicial Review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the City concerning denial, approval, or conditional approval of a local development permit issued under Section 22.8 of this Ordinance shall be appealed to the Superior Court of Jefferson County, Georgia. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the City, may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement of fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e. grant a Variance); 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by court that fall within the jurisdiction of the City Council. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - ENFORCEMENT, FEES AND PENALTIES 

23.1 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector. The Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector or his/her designee shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his/her duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
All commissions, boards, departments, officials and public employees of the City which are vested with the duty of authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance and shall issue no permits or license for any use, building or purpose if same would be in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and void. 
23.2 - Complaints regarding violations. 
Whenever the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this Ordinance, he shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complainant in writing of any action taken. 
23.3 - Persons liable. 
The owner, tenant or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates or maintains any condition that is contrary to the requirements of this Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and subject to the remedies provided herein. 
23.4 - Procedures upon discovery of violations. 
(a)  If the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector finds that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he shall send a written notice to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
(b)  The written notice prepared by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector shall state that all activity prohibited by this Ordinance shall cease immediately and that construction or development relating to the violation shall not continue until such time corrective action has been taken by the property owner/contractor. 
(c)  The written notice shall further state what action the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector intends to take if the violation is not corrected. The notice shall advise that the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector's decision or order may be appealed to the Commission as specified in Article 24. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the aforementioned procedures, in situations when a delay by the City in taking action would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this Ordinance or present a danger to the public health, safety, morals and welfare, the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the penalties or remedies enumerated in this Ordinance. 
23.5 - Fees. 
(a)  Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the cost of administration, inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to applicants for rezoning applications, Conditional Use permits, building permits, land use permits, Variance applications, Subdivision plat approval, Sign permits and other permits and applications. The amount of the fees charged shall be set by the City Council. 
(b)  Fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time of filing an application with the City Clerk or other appropriate party. 
23.6 - Fines. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment, or both. In no case shall the maximum punishment for violation of Ordinance exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Violations of Ordinances in the City may be tried upon citation with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. 
(b)  Each and every day an unlawful act or use continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Failure to rectify a violation within 30 days after receiving written notice from the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector that a violation has occurred will result in a levy of a fine of $50.00 per day for each building, structure or alteration found to be in violation of this Ordinance. 
23.7 - Injunction. 
The erection, construction, alteration, renovation, addition, conversion, moving or maintenance of any building or structure and the use of any land or building which is continued, operated or maintained, contrary to any provisions of this Ordinance is hereby declared to be in violation of this Ordinance and unlawful. At the direction of the City Council, the City Attorney shall, upon receiving notice of any such violations, institute injunction, abatement or any other appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violation. The remedy provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
23.8 - Permit revocation. 
(a)  A building permit, land use permit, Conditional Use Permit, Sign Permit or any other permit regulated by this Ordinance may be revoked by the permit issuing authority if the permit recipient fails to develop, construct or maintain the property or structure in accordance with the plans submitted pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance or any additional requirements lawfully imposed by the permit issuing body. 
(b)  Before a Conditional Use permit may be revoked, all of the notice and hearing and other requirements of Article 18 shall be complied with. Additionally, a written notice from the Zoning Administrator shall inform the Conditional Use permit recipient of the alleged grounds for the revocation. 
(c)  Before a building permit, land use permit or sign permit may be revoked, the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector shall give the permit recipient ten days notice of intent to revoke the permit. The Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons for the revocation and of his/her right to obtain an informal hearing on the allegations. If the permit is revoked, the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector shall provide to the permit holder a written statement of the decision and the reasons therefore. 
(d)  The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to authorize the permit issuing authority to conclude that a permit should be revoked shall be upon the party seeking the permit revocation. 
(e)  A motion by the governing body to revoke a permit, if required, shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact that support the motion. 
(f)  No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by any building permit, land use permit, Conditional Use permit or Sign permit after such permit has been revoked in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
23.9 - Filing or recording of nonapproved plats. 
The filing or recording of a final plat of a subdivision without the approval required by these regulations, or the filing and recording of any sketch plan or preliminary plat as a "record" plat is hereby declared a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided by law. 
23.10 - Notice to recording official. 
The Superior Court Clerk of Jefferson County, Georgia, shall not accept, file or record any sketch plan, preliminary plat, or any final record plat involving any property subject to these regulations which has not been approved according to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
23.11 - Transfer of lots in unapproved subdivision. 
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the City who transfers, sells, agrees to sell or negotiates the sale of such land by reference to or exhibition of a plat of subdivision before said plat has been duly approved and recorded in the office of the Superior Court Clerk of Jefferson County, Georgia, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this Ordinance. The description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or sales contract used in the process of selling or transfer, in absence of a plat, shall not exempt the transaction from these penalties. The City may enjoin such transfer or sale agreement by appropriate action. 
23.12 - Erection of buildings. 
Any building erected in violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed an unlawful structure and the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated and/or removed. 
23.13 - Street names. 
It shall be unlawful for any person developing a new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by any marking or by reference in any deed or instrument without first obtaining the approval of the City Council. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, punished as provided in this Ordinance. 
23.14 - Judicial review. 
Any person or persons aggrieved by any action or decision of the City Council shall file a petition for a writ of mandamus in the Superior Court of Jefferson County, Georgia. Said action must be filed within 30 days of the date of the final decision of the City Council. If the property owner fails to adhere to the 30 day requirement, his/her claim will be time barred. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - APPEALS 
The Commission shall have the power and duty to hear and decide the following types of appeals and applications and to that end shall have the necessary authority to ensure continuing compliance with its decision. 

24.1 - Appeals procedure. 
The Commission shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order requirement, decision or refusal made by the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector or other administrative official in the administration or enforcement of any provisions of this Ordinance. Such appeals shall be in conducted accordance with the following sections. 
24.1.1  Appeals. An appeal to the Commission may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision with respect to this Ordinance. Such appeal shall be made within 15 days following notification of the decision appealed from, by filing with the City Clerk, a written notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The City Clerk shall deliver the written notice of appeal to the Commission. 
24.1.2  Stay of Proceedings. A notice of appeal shall stay all legal proceedings related to the appeal. The Zoning Administrator may certify to the Commission, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent threat to life and/or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by a Court of competent jurisdiction, with notice provided to the Zoning Administrator. 
24.1.3  Notice of Hearing. The Commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal or other matter referred to it and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the hearing location, date, and time. The public notice shall indicate the nature of the appeal to be considered by the Commission. 
24.1.4  Limitation of Commission Power. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the Commission to change the terms of this Ordinance or to effect changes in zoning districts. The powers of the Commission shall be so applied that the terms of these regulations will be strictly enforced. 
24.1.5  Exercise of Power. In exercising its powers, the Commission, in conformity with the terms of this Ordinance, may modify in whole or in part any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector or other administrative official. Voting by the Commission shall be in accordance with Section 3.1.3 of this Ordinance in order to reverse or modify, on appeal, any order, requirement, or decision or determination. 
The Commission shall render a decision on all such appeals. The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall notify the applicant in writing of the Commission's action within five days of the Commission's decision. 
24.1.6  Denial of Request. An application that has been denied by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector, and which decision was upheld by the Commission, shall not be further considered by the Commission unless: 
(a)  The new plans materially change the nature of the request; or 
(b)  The permitted development of other nearby property in the same zone has been substantially altered or changed by a ruling of the Commission so as to support an allegation of changed conditions. 
24.1.7  Appeal of the Commission Decision. Any person or persons, jointly or separately, aggrieved by a decision of the Commission may appeal to the City Council. All appeals from the decision of the Commission must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within 30 days of the Commission's decision. Failure of the applicant to file an appeal during this 30 day period will result in the forfeiture of the appeals process. Appeals from final decisions of the City Council shall comply with Section 23.14. 
24.2 - Interpretations by Commission. 
The Commission is authorized to render an interpretation of the Zoning Map, this Ordinance, or the manner of their application where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector in the administration of such provisions. In reaching its decision, the Commission shall establish firm guidelines for future administrative actions on similar or like matters. 
ARTICLE XXV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

25.1 - Validity of Ordinance. 
Should any article, section, clause or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid; each article, section, clause and provision hereof being declared severable. 
25.2 - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of any other statute, law, or Ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by the regulations and provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of such other statute, law or Ordinance shall govern. 
25.3 - Enactment of this Ordinance. 
The enactment of this Ordinance shall operate as a specific repeal of the prior Zoning Ordinance known as the 1997 Wrens Unified Development Ordinance. 
25.4 - Repeal of conflicting ordinances and validity of prior approvals and actions. 
This is the Unified Development Ordinance of the City of Wrens, Georgia, and all other conflicting City Code provisions, Ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of site development accompanying zoning approvals or use permits issued for developments already in progress before adoption of this Ordinance; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this Ordinance. 
All Variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the City Council or other applicable authority shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations previously imposed shall remain in effect and be binding. Prior Ordinances shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against such violations and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
25.5 - Effective date. 
This Unified Development Ordinance shall become effective the next business day following the adoption of this Ordinance. 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Unified Development Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia State Law. 

 