THE CODE OF CUMMING, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
Republished in 2013 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CUMMING, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
H. Ford Gravitt (Mayor) 
Quincy Holton (Councilmember) 
Charles L. Ledbetter (Councilmember) 
Ralph W. Perry (Councilmember) 
John D. Pugh (Councilmember) 
Rupert L. Sexton (Councilmember) 
Mayor and Council 
____________ 
Gerald R. Blackburn 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Steve G. Bennett 
Assistant City Administrator 
____________ 
Dana B. Miles 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jeffery E. Honea 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, embracing ordinances adopted through December 16, 1997, and other ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code and any ordinance included herein. 
This 2013 republication includes all amendatory legislation through ordinances adopted July 17, 2012, and was accomplished under the supervision of Mary Summers, Editor. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Karen Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Dana B. Miles, City Attorney, and Mr. Jeff Honea, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code that will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cumming, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cumming, Georgia. 2013. 
"Code of Cumming Georgia" Ordinance 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CUMMING, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by authority of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Cumming, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Cumming Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 113, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 15, 2010, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of the Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of the Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of the Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each violation is a separate offense. 
(4)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(5)  Violations of the Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. 
(6)  The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 15, 2010, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption. 
I hereunto set my hand and cause the seal of the City of Cumming, Georgia to be affixed this 17th day of August, 2010. 
  



  

  ____________      Date 
  
      Seal: 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
An Act to change the name of the "Town of Cumming" to the "City of Cumming", and to incorporate the municipality heretofore known as the "Town of Cumming" in Forsyth County under the name of the "City of Cumming" in the County of Forsyth, and to repeal the Act approved October 10, 1885, and the several Acts amendatory thereof, and to provide a new Charter for said municipality; to consolidate into and supersede by this Act to incorporate the "City of Cumming" in lieu of said "Town of Cumming; " to substitute the "City of Cumming" for the "Town of Cumming" wherever said municipality is mentioned in the Constitution of the laws of Georgia; to define the territorial limits of the City of Cumming, and to confer extraterritorial jurisdiction upon said city within certain adjacent territory; to provide for the execution, service, and return of certain writs, warrants, or executions of said city beyond the limits of said city and within the state; to provide for a mayor and council, and other officers of the City of Cumming; to prescribe and provide their powers, duties, qualifications, terms of office, and the manner of their election; to provide for all valid contracts heretofore entered into by the Town of Cumming or the mayor and council of the Town of Cumming as heretofore incorporated, shall be binding and effective upon the City of Cumming hereby incorporated; to provide that all ordinances of the Town of Cumming or the Mayor and Council of the Town of Cumming heretofore incorporated, not in conflict with this Charter and incorporated, shall be valid and enforceable as ordinances of the City of Cumming hereby incorporated; to provide that all property new and heretofore held and owned by the Town of Cumming, or the mayor and council of the Town of Cumming as heretofore incorporated, shall be and become the rights of the property of the City of Cumming hereby incorporated; to confer any necessary authority upon said City of Cumming hereby incorporated enable it to establish equip, maintain, modify, extend, and improve a system of sewerage and drains in said city, and for the assessment and collection of the expenses and costs thereof, and the issuance of sewerage and drainage certificates; to provide for the exercise of the right of eminent domain in and by said city; to provide a system of taxation for said city; to provide for the enacting of all necessary ordinances, and to provide penalties for the violation of same; to provide for a board of health; to declare and define certain police powers of said city; to provide for the condemnation of private, public, or semi-public property for the use of said city, either within or without the corporate limits thereof, and compensation to the owners thereof; to provide for taxation and the granting of licenses for all kinds of business, trades, callings and professions, shows, exhibitions or entertainments; to provide for the retention in office of the present officers of the Town of Cumming hereby abolished and repealed, as officers of the City of Cumming hereby incorporated and established; to provide for the qualification and registration of voters in the City of Cumming; to provide for a municipal judge and a municipal court, and the trial and punishment therein of all offenders against the laws of said city and the manner of appeal therefrom; to grant and regulate franchises; to provide rules and regulations governing public service corporations; to provide for opening and laying out, establishing, maintaining, improving, and paving streets, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, and crossings in said city; to assess and collect from the owners of properties fronting on said streets and sidewalks, equally and ratably according to their respective frontals, the cost of such paving and improvement, and in addition thereto to assess and collect from any railroad company the cost of paving and improving so much of said streets and sidewalks as is occupied by their rights-of-way; to provide when and how all assessments are to be made, and when and how they may be paid and collected, and for the issuance of bonds therefor; to abate nuisances; to provide for the assessment, levy and collection of an allowance tax on all property, real and personal, for general purposes; to authorize the assessment and collection of a tax for street work and improvements to grant encroachments on the streets; to declare and constitute the rights and powers of the City of Cumming hereby established; to provide for a city chain-gang and guard-house and the work of prisoners therein, and the regulation and management of the same; to provide for a fire department; to authorize the mayor and council of said city to maintain and operate a system of water works, sanitary and/or storm sewers and an electric light plant either to produce or distribute current; to authorize said city to borrow money; to provide for parks, public buildings, and other municipal improvements; to create and maintain on the part of said city a Chamber of Commerce or Commercial Club; to declare and define the public powers of said city, and provide for all matters of municipal concern and cognizance; to confer power upon said city to acquire and own property beyond its corporate limits for certain purposes; to provide for a city depository; to provide for a general policing and all police laws for the general welfare of the municipality; to confer power to establish police limits of said city beyond the corporate tax limits thereof; to provide for all matters and things necessary and proper, or incident to a municipal corporation; to provide for primaries and wards in the discretion of the mayor and council of said city; and for other purposes. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this part is the city's Charter, being 1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 437), page 1001. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the term "police court" has been changed to "municipal court," and the term "recorder" has been changed to "municipal court judge" without notation. 

Sec. 1. - Corporate name. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that from and after the passage of this Act, the name of that municipality of Forsyth County, Georgia, the county seat of said county, heretofore known and designated as the "Town of Cumming" shall be and is hereby changed to the "City of Cumming" by which name said municipality and county seat shall be henceforth known and designated, and an Act to incorporate and provide a new Charter for the Town of Cumming approved October 10, 1885, and all Acts amendatory thereof, be and the same are hereby consolidated into and superseded by this Act, and all provisions of former Acts inconsistent or at variance with this Act or any provisions hereof are hereby expressly repealed, and all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 2. - General powers. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the passage of this Act the inhabitants of the territory in which County of Forsyth hereinafter described are hereby incorporated by the name and style of the "City of Cumming," a body corporate and politic, with power to govern themselves by such ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and by-laws for municipal purposes as may be adopted and promulgated under the terms and provisions of this Charter, not in conflict with the Constitution or laws of this state or of the United States. The corporate limits of said city shall extend and embrace all that territory lying and being within one mile in every direction from the court house now located in said city. The said defined territory is hereby incorporated under the name and style of the "City of Cumming" and the City of Cumming is hereby chartered and given all of the privileges and benefits conferred upon municipalities by the Constitution and laws of Georgia, and by said name and style is established and shall have perpetual succession, and is hereby vested with all the rights, powers and privileges, titles, properties, easements or hereditaments now belonging or in any wise appertaining to the Town of Cumming or to the mayor and council of the Town of Cumming as heretofore incorporated, shall be and is hereby vested in the City of Cumming as created by this Act, and the City of Cumming in the County of Forsyth, State of Georgia, created, established, and declared by this Act may in name sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, plead and be impleaded, have and use a corporate seal, make and enact, through its proper officers hereinafter provided for, such ordinances, rules, and regulations for the transaction of its business, and for the welfare and proper government of said city as its mayor and council may deem best, and do all other things necessary to promote the municipal corporate purposes of said city; and the City of Cumming shall be capable in law to purchase, hold, enjoy, receive, possess, retain, and manage in perpetuity lands, tenements, or hereditaments of every kind and description whatsoever, or any interest in real or personal property, within or without the corporate limits of said city, for corporate purposes, and to sell, lease, alien, convey, exchange, or dispose of the same or any part thereof. The said City of Cumming, created by this Act, is hereby made responsible as a body corporate for the legal debts and liabilities and undertakings of said Town of Cumming as heretofore incorporated; and all ordinances now in force in the Town of Cumming, or the mayor and council thereof, as heretofore incorporated, and not repugnant to the provisions of this Charter or the laws of Georgia shall be and are hereby continued in force in said City of Cumming incorporated by this Act. The present mayor and council of the Town of Cumming shall continue in office as mayor and council of said City of Cumming incorporated under this Act until their present term expires, or their successors are elected and qualified; and all other officers of the Town of Cumming as heretofore incorporated shall continue in office as such officers of the said City of Cumming incorporated under this Act, until their present terms expire, or their successors are elected and qualified, subject, however, to the provisions of this Act with further reference thereto; it being the purpose of this Act to abolish the Town of Cumming heretofore incorporated and establish the City of Cumming hereby incorporated in its stead, to change the name of that territory heretofore known as the Town of Cumming to be henceforth known as the City of Cumming; to create and establish a new Charter for said territory and the inhabitants thereof under the corporate name of the City of Cumming hereby established; to have the City of Cumming hereby incorporated to in every way supersede the Town of Cumming heretofore incorporated, and establish same in lieu thereof, and to have the City of Cumming hereby incorporated succeed to all the rights, powers, privileges, and benefits, and to be subject to all the duties, obligations, liabilities, and responsibilities of said Town of Cumming heretofore incorporated. This Act changing the "Town of Cumming" to the "City of Cumming," and providing a new Charter for said "City of Cumming; " the municipality of Cumming in Forsyth County being and the same is hereby incorporated under the corporate name of the "City of Cumming," and said "City of Cumming" is hereby substituted for the "Town of Cumming" wherever said municipality is mentioned or referred to in the Constitution or laws of this State and any reference to or mention of said "Town of Cumming" in the Constitution or laws of Georgia shall henceforth be construed to refer to, mention, and mean the "City of Cumming." 
In addition to the present corporate limits of the City of Cumming, the corporate limits of said city shall also embrace and include the following described property, to wit: 
Segment 1: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Forsyth County, Georgia, and is more fully described as follows: "Beginning at the southwest corner of land lot 1,051 and running thence north 0 degrees 6 minutes east 469.5 feet; thence north 0 degrees 27 minutes east 618 feet to a point in the center of a branch known as Kennemore Branch; thence in an easterly direction along and with the meandering course of the center line of Kennemore Branch a distance of 1,150 feet, more or less, to a point where the center of Kennemore Branch intersects the center of Dobbs Creek; thence southeasterly along and with the center of Dobbs Creek a distance of 150 feet, more or less, to where the center of Dobbs Creek intersects the center of U. S. Highway 19; thence in a southwesterly direction along and with the center of U. S. Highway 19 a distance of 1,698 feet to a point in land lot 1,110; thence north 54 degrees west 320 feet; thence north 22 degrees 30 minutes east 240 feet; thence north 55 degrees west 254 feet to the northwest corner of land lot 1,110, the same being the southwest corner of land lot 1,051, which is the point of beginning. Said property lies in the third district and first section, and being part of land lots nos. 1,051 and 1,110, Forsyth County, Georgia. 
Segment 2: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Forsyth County, Georgia, and lying contiguous to existing corporate limits of the City of Cumming, and is more fully described as follows: "Beginning at a point where the center of State Highway No. 306 intersects the center of Bettis Gap Road, and running thence northeasterly along the center of Bettis Gap Road a distance of 1,058 feet to a point; thence north 89 degrees 30 minutes east 862.5 feet to a point; thence south 8 degrees 15 minutes west 951 feet; thence north 81 degrees east 200 feet; thence due south 210 feet to a point in center of said Highway 306; thence westerly along the center line of said highway a distance of 670 feet to the intersection of Highway 306 and Bettis Gap Road, which is the point of beginning. 
Said Segments 1 and 2 are more fully shown on plats prepared by Cecil S. Mize, Forsyth County Surveyor, dated February 28, 1967, which plats are made a part of this description by reference. 
The property being so annexed is described as follows: 
Segment A: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Forsyth County, Georgia, and lying contiguous to existing corporate limits of the City of Cumming, Georgia, and is more fully described as follows: "Beginning where the center of Lanier Road, also known as Buford Dam Road intersects the center of Sanders Road and running thence northerly along the center of Sanders Road a distance of 3,600 feet, more or less, to a point where the center of Sanders Road, when extended would intersect the northerly margin of Mary Alice Park Road, also known as the New Corinth Church Road; thence due north 300 feet; thence north 76 degrees 15 minutes west 1,270 feet to a point which is existing corporate limits of the City of Cumming; thence in a southwesterly direction along and with said corporate limits a distance of 2,700 feet, more or less, to a point in center of Lanier (Buford Dam) Road; thence southeasterly and easterly along and with the center of said road 4,400 feet, more or less, to the point where the center of Lanier Road intersects Sanders Road, which is the point of beginning. 
Segment A is more fully shown on plat prepared by Cecil S. Mize, Forsyth County Surveyor, dated June 1, 1966, to which plat reference is made for a more complete description of said property. 
Segment B: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Forsyth County, Georgia and lying contiguous to the existing corporate limits of the City of Cumming, and is more fully described as follows: "Beginning at a point where the center of Tribble Gap Road, also known as Tribble Street intersects the center of Sawnee Drive, which is Georgia Highway No. 306, and running thence easterly along the center of Sawnee Drive a distance of 670 feet to corner; thence due north 210 feet; thence south 81 degrees east 200 feet; thence north 8 degrees 15 minutes east 951 feet; thence north 89 degrees 15 minutes east 770 feet; thence south 55 degrees east 254 feet; thence south 22 degrees 30 minutes west 240 feet; thence south 54 degrees east 320 feet to a point in center of U. S. Highway 19; thence northerly along the center of said U. S. Highway 19 a distance of 1,700 feet, more or less, to a point where the center of U. S. Highway 19 intersects the center of Pilgrim Mill Creek, also known as Dobbs Creek; thence southeasterly and easterly along and with the center of Pilgrim Mill Creek a distance of 2,850 feet, more or less, to the north original line of land lot 1,113; thence east along the north original line of land lot 1,113 and continuing along the north original line of land lot 1,114 a distance of 1,700 feet, more or less, to a point where the center of Pilgrim Mill Road intersects the north original line of land lot 1,114; thence southwesterly along the center of Pilgrim Mill Road 3,200 feet to a point thereon; thence south 10 degrees west 4,700 feet, more or less, to a point where existing corporate limits intersects the center of Pirkle Ferry Road; thence in a northwesterly direction along and with the existing corporate limits line a distance of 6,700 feet, more or less, to a point where existing corporate limits line intersects the center of Tribble Gap Road; thence North along the center of Tribble Gap Road 900 feet, more or less, to a point where the center of Tribble Gap Road intersects the center of Sawnee Drive, which is the point of beginning. 
Segment B is more fully shown on plat prepared by Cecil S. Mize, Forsyth County Surveyor, dated June 1, 1966, to which plat reference is made for a more complete description of said property. 
Less and except from segment B, the following described property: "All that tract or parcel of land known as Dobbs Estate, bounded on the north by Pilgrim Mill Creek; on the east by an old abandoned road; on the south by Pirklewood Circle Road; on the west by U. S. Highway 19, and is more fully shown on the above mentioned plat. 
Less and except from segment B: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the third district and first section and described as being all of subdivision lot no. 12 of the Pirklewood subdivision, as shown on plat recorded in plat book 2, page 38, clerk's office, Forsyth Superior Court, which recorded plat is made a part hereof for a better description of said excepted tract. 
Said Subdivision lot no. 12 being presently owned by Walter H. Rucker. 
Less and except from segment B: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the third district and first section of said county and being parts of land lots 1,109 and 1,124 and all of land lot 1,123 and is more fully described in a deed from John A. Kelly to F. G. Merritt, recorded in deed book 3, page 197, clerk's office, Forsyth Superior Court. Said deed is made a part of this description by reference." 
In addition to the present corporate limits of the City of Cumming the corporate limits of said city shall also embrace and include the following described property, to wit: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the Third District and First Section of Forsyth County, Georgia, and is all of Land Lot No. 1,123 and part of Land Lots No. 1,109 and 1,124 and is more fully described as follows: 
BEGINNING at the Northeast corner of Land Lot 1,123; thence North 88 degrees 22 minutes West 1,203 feet to Northwest corner thereof; thence North 6 degrees 21 minutes West 151 feet to a point on Southeasterly right-of-way of U. S. Highway 19; thence Southwesterly along Southeasterly right-of-way of U. S. Highway 19, 463.7 feet to a gully; thence Southeasterly along gully as follows: South 77 degrees 27 minutes East 68.4 feet South 58 degrees 54 minutes East 100 feet, South 43 degrees 34 minutes East 100 feet, South 40 degrees 1 minute East 100 feet, South 30 degrees 46 minutes East 33.5 feet to a point on West original line of Land Lot 1,123; thence South 1 degree 43 minutes West 760.3 feet to Southwest corner of Land Lot 1,123; thence South 89 degrees 34 minutes East 1,203 feet to Southeast corner of land lot; thence North 1 degree 43 minutes East 1,216 feet to Northeast corner of Land Lot 1,123 which is the point of beginning. 
Said property is more fully shown on plat prepared by Cecil S. Mize, Registered Surveyor No. 1593, dated October, 1968, to which plat reference is made for a more complete description of said property. Said tract contains in the aggregate 36.24 acres, more or less. Said property is bound on all sides by property lying within the corporate limits of the City of Cumming. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1088), page 3345, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 756), page 3963, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Governing authority designated. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the municipal government of said City of Cumming shall be vested in a mayor and five councilmen, that the mayor and councilmen shall be collectively known as the "City Council of Cumming," and shall be the supreme governing body, exercising all the powers herein conferred upon the corporation and not otherwise specifically delegated. 
Sec. 4. - Initial members of governing authority. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayor of the City of Cumming shall be Roy P. Otwell, and the Councilmen of said city shall be S. P. Pettey, G. M. Puett, Geo. L. Merritt, M. P. Holbrooks and B. L. Redd, who shall continue in their respective offices until their successors are elected and qualified as provided in this Act; and said mayor and council shall have and exercise all the rights, powers, duties and authority conferred upon the mayor and councilmen of said "City of Cumming" by virtue of this Charter. 
Sec. 5. - Term of mayor. 
The Mayor of the City of Cumming shall be elected as herein prescribed and except as provided in Section 7, infra , shall hold office for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. The term of office of the present Mayor shall expire January 1, 2012, on which date the two-year term of the next duly elected Mayor of the city shall begin, followed by four-year terms beginning January 1, 2014 and thereafter as provided in Section 7, infra . 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 451), page 3914, § 1; Ord. of 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 6. - Terms of council members. 
Except as provided in Section 7, infra , the members of the Council shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are qualified and elected. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 451), page 3914, § 2; Ord. of 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 7. - Initial election staggering terms. 
The election for Mayor and Council members shall be held on the first Tuesday in November, 2011 at which time there shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City a Mayor and five (5) Council members. The Council members holding posts 3, 4 and 5 shall hold office for the term of four (4) years beginning January 1, 2012, and until their successors are elected and qualified. The Mayor and Council members holding posts 1 and 2 shall hold office for the term of two (2) years beginning January 1, 2012, and until their successors are elected and qualified thereafter. Beginning with the election held in November 2013 and thereafter, the Mayor and Council members holding posts 1 and 2 shall run for and serve terms of four (4) years. Thus, there will be an election every two years and the four-year terms of the Mayor and Council will be staggered as set forth above. 
(Ord. of 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 8. - Vacancy, forfeiture of office, filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of Mayor or Council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of Mayor or Council member shall be filled as follows: In the event of a vacancy in the office of the Mayor or Council member, the Mayor and Council shall appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy until a special election is held as set forth below. If a tie vote by the Mayor and Council to fill a vacancy is unbroken for 15 days, the Mayor, or Mayor Pro Tempore in the case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy. Once a vacancy is filled by appointment, a special election shall be called and held to fill the balance of the unexpired term. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if such vacancy occurs within 180 days prior to a regular election for the vacant office of the Mayor or Council member, the appointee shall serve until the election, the vacancy shall be filled at the regular election, and in such event, no special election shall be held. Special elections shall be called and held according to the next applicable special election date after a vacancy is created. In all other respects, special elections shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Charter and Article 14, Chapter 2 of the "Georgia Election Code." 
(Ord. of 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 9. - Organizational meeting of governing authority. 
Be it further enacted, that on the first day of January (unless said first day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday in which event on the following day) after their election, the mayor-elect, councilmen-elect, and the two councilmen shall meet at the council chamber of said city for the purpose of organizing, and the mayor-elect and councilmen-elect shall severally take, before some officer authorized to administer oaths, the following oath of office, to wit: I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform my duties as mayor (or councilman) of the City of Cumming during my term of office, and that I will faithfully enforce the laws and ordinances of said city to the best of my ability without fear or failure, and in all actions as mayor (or councilman) act as I believe for the best interest of the city, and uphold the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States; so help me God." Should the mayor or any councilman be absent from said meeting, he or they may take oath of office as soon thereafter as possible. 
Sec. 10. - Meetings of city council. 
The council shall hold regular public meetings at a stated time and place, as provided by ordinance. The meetings of the council shall be held at the council chamber at which time all regular business concerning the welfare of said city shall be transacted. The council shall meet in special session on written call of the mayor or any two councilmen and served on the other members personally or left at their residence at least 12 hours in advance of the meeting, but such notice of special meeting shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Only the business stated in the written call may be transacted at a special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members of the council. The council shall exercise its powers only in public meetings. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1088), page 3345, § 2) 
Sec. 11. - Conduct of elections. 
All elections held under the provisions of this Charter, and all elections in which any subject or question is submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Cumming shall be managed by a justice of the peace or some other judicial officer and two freeholders who are citizens of said city and own real estate therein, or by any three freeholders designated by the mayor or city council; all of said freeholders shall be citizens of said city and own real estate therein; and said managers, before entering upon their duties, shall take and subscribe, before some officer qualified to administer oaths, the following oath, to wit: "We do swear that we will faithfully and impartially conduct this election according to law, and will prevent illegal voting to the best of our skill and knowledge, and will make true returns thereof; so help me God." Said managers shall keep, or cause to be kept two lists of voters at said elections, and two tally-sheets. All elections shall be held at the city council chamber in said city, and the voting shall be by ballot. The polls shall be opened at 7:00 o'clock a.m., and be closed at 7:00 o'clock p.m. The persons receiving the highest number of legal votes for the respective office shall be declared elected. All elections held under the provisions of this Charter shall be under the forms, rules, and regulations prescribed by law for the election of members of the General Assembly of said State, in so far as they are applicable to such elections and do not conflict with the rules and provisions herein prescribed." 
(1953 Ga. Laws (Jan.—Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 411), page 3001, § 1; 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1088), page 3345, § 3) 
Sec. 12. - Handling of election results. 
Be it further enacted, that after each election the managers thereof shall immediately make out and sign a certificate of return under oath of the election; said certificate shall give the name of each candidate voted for, the number of votes received by each candidate, and the office for which he is a candidate. One copy of said return, together with all the ballots voted, the voters' lists and all other papers used in said election shall be by them delivered under seal to the clerk of the City Council of Cumming; and a certificate showing the result of said election shall be by them delivered to the clerk of the City Council of Cumming, before twelve o'clock noon, the following day of the election; whereupon, it shall be the duty of said clerk to declare the result of said election and record the same upon the minutes of said City Council of Cumming. All election returns, ballots, lists, and other papers so deposited with the clerk of the city council under seal shall be by him kept for the space of twenty days after said election, and be by him destroyed without examination, provided no contest is had. In event of a contest it shall be his duty to keep all the papers until called upon to produce them in the court having jurisdiction of the contest, and after such contest shall have been concluded he shall destroy all papers without examination. 
Sec. 13. - Persons eligible to vote. 
Be it further enacted, that all persons qualified to vote in this state for members of the General Assembly, who have paid all taxes legally imposed and demanded by the authorities of said city, and who shall have resided in said city six months prior to the election at which they offer to vote, and who shall have registered as required by the registration laws or ordinances of said city, shall be qualified to vote at any election held under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 14. - Voter registration. 
Be it further enacted, that it shall be the duty of the clerk of said city, on the last Monday in October of each election year, to open the registration books for the registration of the qualified voters of said city. Said books shall be kept open to the public during the legal hours for registering each and every day which said hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. until 2:00 p.m. (Sunday and legal holidays excepted) until ten days prior to the date of the election on which day at 2:00 p.m. said books shall be finally and absolutely closed. The qualification date for candidates for the offices of mayor and councilmen shall open on the same date the registration of voters opens and shall close thirteen days prior to the date of the election at 12:00 noon on such date. It shall be the duty of the clerk, upon application in person and not by proxy of any citizen who is qualified to vote for the members of the General Assembly and who upon the day of the election, is then a resident, will then have resided in said city six months prior thereto, to allow such persons to register his or her name in said book of registration, and shall in every case, before allowing the applicant to register, administer to him or her the following oath: "You do solemnly swear that you are a citizen of the United States, that you have resided in the City of Cumming for six months next preceding this registration, or that by the date of the next election held in and for said city, if then a resident, you will have done so; that you are 18 years of age, or will be so prior to said day of election, so help you God." 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of said city to prepare two lists of names of the voters registered in alphabetical order, after the same have been purged as herein provided, and furnish the same to the managers of the election, under his official signature and seal of office, at or before the polls are opened. The managers shall keep said list before them during the election, and shall permit no one to vote in said election whose name does not appear thereon; provided, however, that at all times after such registration has commenced said registration list and names shall be open to public inspection during all hours of registration. 
For any special election in said city for any purpose, the clerk shall open the registration books at least thirty days before the date fixed for such election, and shall close the same five days before the day of election, and shall prepare and furnish the registration lists as hereinbefore provided. 
Notice of the opening of the registration books for all elections shall be given in such manner as the mayor and councilmen shall prescribe, at least twenty days before the closing thereof, notice of said opening of said registration books shall be published in the official gazette of said city at least once a week during period of such registration as herein provided. 
Should the name of any person qualified to vote in any election, and who registered therefor with the clerk in due form and time, be accidentally omitted from the registration lists furnished the managers of said election, the clerk of said city may certify under his official signature and seal to such accidental omission to place such name on said list and that said person was duly and legally registered in due time and form before the registration book was closed; and thereupon, by filing said certificate with the managers of the election such person shall be allowed to vote. 
Any person voting in any election held in said city, who is not qualified to vote therein under the provisions of this Act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as prescribed by the laws of this state for illegal voting. 
Within one day following the closing of said registration books as herein provided, said council of the City of Cumming shall select and appoint three freeholders of said city who shall examine, revise and purge the registration lists as made up and returned by the clerk of said city, of all illegally registered voters or persons disqualified from voting for any lawful reason; provided, that before removing any name therefrom, written notice shall be served on the person or persons deemed disqualified at least three days prior to the date of such election, that such persons may show cause, if any, why such action should not be taken. 
(1953 Ga. Laws (Jan.—Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 411), page 3001, § 2; 1953 Ga. Laws (Act No. 230), page 2606, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 756), page 3963, § 2) 
Sec. 14A. - City council posts. 
For the purpose of electing members of the council of the City of Cumming, there are hereby created five council posts, to be designated as posts 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively. Post 1 shall be that post held by Rupert Sexton, post 2 shall be that post held by Quincy Holton, post 3 shall be that post held by Lewis Ledbetter, post 4 shall be that post held by Bass Farr, and post 5 shall be that post held by Ledford Pruitt. Any candidate for membership on the council shall designate the post for which he is offering and name the incumbent, if there is an incumbent, when qualifying. The designation shall be entered upon the ballot and ballot labels in such manner that in the ensuing primary or election such candidate shall only oppose the other candidate or candidates, if any, designating the same specific office. 
(1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 756), page 3963, § 3(14A)) 
Sec. 15. - Eligibility requirements for mayor and councilmen. 
Be it further enacted, that no person shall be eligible to the office of mayor of the city who is not twenty-one years of age, who has not resided in the City of Cumming for a period of one year next preceding the date of his election, and who is not a qualified voter of said city. No person shall be eligible to the office of councilman of the City of Cumming who is not twenty-one years of age, who has not resided in the City of Cumming for the period of one year next prior to his election, and who is not a qualified voter of said city. 
Sec. 16. - Primary elections. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have the authority to provide for and establish rules and regulations governing municipal primaries in and for said city, and for election wards, under such conditions as they may prescribe, not in conflict with the laws of this state. 
Sec. 17. - Selection of mayor pro tem and other officers and employees; salaries and oath of officers and employees. 
Be it further enacted, that at the first regular meeting of the city council of Cumming on the first 2nd Monday in January of each year, they shall elect one of their number mayor pro tempore for a term of one year, who shall, in the absence or disqualification of the mayor, or during a vacancy in said office, be vested with all the authority of the mayor and as such perform all the duties of the mayor. The city council may also at said meetings elect for said city a chief of police and as many policemen as they deem necessary, a municipal judge, clerk and treasurer; a city attorney, and city physician, and may elect such other officers and employees of said city as they may deem necessary; and they shall have power to fix and provide for the salaries or compensation of the officers or employees so elected. All of said officers shall be elected for terms of one year, and until their successors shall be elected and qualified, unless sooner discharged and removed from office. Each of said officers shall take such oath of office, give such bonds and perform such duties as shall be fixed by ordinance; and the city council of Cumming shall have power and authority to suspend and remove such officers from office, or impose fines on said officers for gross neglect or malfeasance, after a fair and impartial trial. 
Sec. 18. - Compensation of mayor and councilmen. 
Beginning on January 1, 2008, the compensation of the mayor shall be $1,000.00 per month and the compensation of each council member shall be $500.00 per month. In addition to this monthly compensation, the mayor and council members shall also be paid $100.00 per individual for each specially called city council meeting, work session or other meeting that has been pre-approved for compensation by the council that they attend other than the regular monthly city council meeting. 
(Ord. of 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 19. - Governing authority; quorum; voting majority required; mayor's veto. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor or mayor pro tem and three councilmen shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority of votes shall determine questions before them; provided, that the mayor or the mayor pro tem, if he is presiding in the place of the mayor, shall vote only in case of a tie vote; and provided further, that all votes making appropriations or authorizing the expenditure of city funds, or fixing the salaries of officers and employees, shall be by the yeas and nays duly recorded on the minutes; and provided further that on any question any councilman may demand the aye and nay vote, and on such demand the vote shall be so taken and recorded on the minutes. 
The mayor or mayor pro tem, when performing the duties of the mayor, shall have the veto power and may veto any resolution or ordinances passed by the council, in which event the same shall not become a law or have the effect of a law unless subsequently and at the next regular meeting thereafter it shall be passed over his veto by three-fourths vote of the entire council, duly recorded on the minutes; but unless he shall file in writing with the clerk of said city his veto of any measure passed by the council, with his reasons for withdrawing his assent, within three days after its passage, the same shall become a law just as if signed and approved by said mayor; but he may approve the same in writing and the measure shall go into effect immediately. 
Sec. 20. - General powers of mayor; extraterritorial jurisdiction of city. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City of Cumming. He shall see that all laws, ordinances, resolutions, and rules of said city are faithfully, fully, and impartially executed and enforced, and that all the officers or employees of said city faithfully and impartially discharge the duties required of them. He shall have general supervision and jurisdiction of the affairs of said city, and shall preside at all meetings of the city council; and shall preserve order and decorum, shall enforce the rules and regulations of the body, and shall have power to punish all persons for contempt of such rules and regulations as the City Council of Cumming may prescribe. He shall have power to convene the city council in special call or extra session when in his judgment it becomes necessary, and shall do so whenever requested by two councilmen in writing. Notice of such special call or extra session shall be given each of the members of the city council who are in the city at the time and at such meetings the mayor and councilmen shall have the right and power to transact any business which they are legally authorized to transact at any regular meeting. He shall have power to appoint special policemen when in his judgment such appointment may be necessary, such policemen to be discharged when the emergency requiring their services is past, and to be compensated as the mayor and councilmen may determine. 
For the purpose of the exercise by the authority of said city of police power and authority over offenses, matters or things affecting in any manner or degree health, peace, good order, safety, and morals, and over persons offending against the laws or ordinances relating thereto, the corporate limits proper, heretofore defined, are hereby extended for a distance of one mile in every direction, and within said extended corporate limits power and authority to exercise such police power and authority is hereby vested in and conferred upon city council of said city; and all valid ordinances of said city heretofore or hereafter enacted, relative to or covering said offenses, matters, or things or said offending persons, shall become and be operative and of full force and effect in and throughout the territory which shall be known as the city's police limits, and the power and authority is hereby vested in and conferred upon any and all of the police or arresting officers of said city, in the enforcement of said ordinances, to make arrests or execute warrants or other process of the city within said territory and to make arrests therein for the violation of any State law relative to said offenses, matter or thing, or offending persons; and all summons, subpoenas, warrants, and writs issued by authority of said city shall be operative and have full force and effect in said territory. 
Sec. 21. - Judicial branch. 
Sec. 21.1. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Cumming. 
(1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 30), page 3616, § 1(21.1)) 
Sec. 21.2. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by the city council. 
(d)  Judges shall serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 30), page 3616, § 1(21.2)) 
Sec. 21.3. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance or at such other times as deemed necessary by the judge to keep current the dockets thereof. 
(1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 30), page 3616, § 1(21.3)) 
Sec. 21.4. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all ordinances of the city, and such other violations as provided by law, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The abatement of nuisances; 
(2)  The prosecution of traffic offenses as set forth in title 40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 40]; 
(3)  The prosecution of offenses relating to marijuana possession as set forth in code section 36-32-6 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6]; 
(4)  The prosecution of offenses relating to operating a motor vehicle without effective insurance as set forth in code section 36-32-7 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-32-7]; 
(5)  The prosecution of offenses relating to operating a motor vehicle without a certificate of emissions inspection as set forth in code section 36-32-8 of the O.C.G.A [O.C.G.A. § 36-32-8]; 
(6)  The prosecution of offenses relating to shoplifting as set forth in code section 36-32-9 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-32-9]; 
(7)  The prosecution of offenses relating to alcoholic beverages and persons under 21 years of age as set forth in code section 36-32-10 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10]; 
(8)  The same powers and authorities of magistrate judges in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatever nature as set forth in code sections 15-10-2 and 36-32-3 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-2, 36-32-3]; and 
(9)  Any additional power, authority, or jurisdiction granted to municipal courts pursuant to the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the costs of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the costs of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its order, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  If the chief judge is for any reason temporarily unable to perform the duties of the office, or if during a limited period of time the workload of the municipal court is such that a temporary additional judge is required, the chief judge may request a superior court judge, state court judge, magistrate, municipal court judge, or other qualified individual who is a member of the State Bar of Georgia to sit and hold court during the chief judge's absence. 
(j)  The council is authorized to appoint a prosecutor for the purpose of prosecuting cases coming before the municipal court who shall serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the council. Compensation of the prosecutor so appointed shall be fixed by the council. 
(1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 30), page 3616, § 1(21.4)) 
Sec. 21.5. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Forsyth County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 30), page 3616, § 1(21.5)) 
Sec. 21.6. - Rules for municipal court. 
With the approval of the council, the judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in proceedings before the municipal court at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 30), page 3616, § 1(21.6)) 
Sec. 22. - City jail. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to maintain a city guard-house and to establish and provide regulation therefor, in which shall be confined for punishment, when necessary, persons sentenced by the municipal court for violating any of the laws or ordinances of said city, as well as for the safe detention until trial of all persons who have violated any of the laws or ordinances thereof. 
Sec. 23. - Chain gang. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to establish a chain-gang in and for said city, and to confine therein persons who have been sentenced by the municipal court to work on the streets or public work of said city; they shall have power to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary and suitable for the care, safekeeping and control of said chain-gang, and to enforce the same through its proper officers, and may prescribe adequate punishment in the event of a failure of any person confined in said chain-gang to comply with the terms of said sentence not in conflict with the laws of this state. 
Sec. 24. - Arrests; requiring aid of bystanders. 
Be it further enacted, that it shall be lawful for the chief of police or any police officer of said city to arrest without warrant all disorderly and turbulent persons within the corporate limits of said city who will not desist on command, and confine them in the guard-house until they can be brought before the municipal court to answer for their misconduct. And said officers are authorized and empowered to arrest, with or without warrant, any person or persons within the corporate limits of said city who at the time of said arrest or before that time have been guilty of violating any of the laws or ordinances of said city, and to hold such person so arrested until a hearing of the matter before the municipal court can be had, in all such cases where the offense was committed in the presence of the arresting officer, or if the defendant is endeavoring to escape, or if for any other cause there is likely to be a failure of justice for want of an officer to issue a warrant; and to this end said arresting officers are authorized to imprison and confine persons arrested by them in the guard-house of said city for a reasonable length of time. 
The chief of police and police officers of said city are authorized, to the same extent as sheriffs of this state, to execute warrants placed in their hands, charging any persons with violating the criminal laws of this state. The chief of police and police officers of said city are also authorized anywhere within this state to arrest any person charged with violating the laws or ordinances thereof; provided, when the arrest is not made within twenty-four hours after the offense is committed, said officers are not authorized to arrest the offender outside of the corporate limits of said city, except in obedience to written warrant signed by the mayor, mayor pro tem, or acting mayor. Said chief of police and police officers of said city may take bonds for the appearance before the municipal court for trial, and all such bonds may be forfeited as provided in this Charter. 
And said City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to authorize and require the chief of police and police officers of said city to summon any and all bystanders to aid in the arrest of any person or persons violating any ordinance of said city, or any criminal law of this state, and to provide punishment for any person or persons failing or refusing to obey such summons. 
Sec. 25. - General powers of police. 
Be it further enacted, that it shall be the duty of the chief of police by himself or through the force under him and at his command, at all times, to preserve the public peace, good order and tranquility of said city and its inhabitants, to prevent the commission of crime and arrest offenders, to protect the rights of persons and property, to provide proper police force and protection at fires, to protect strangers and travelers within the city, to suppress riots and insurrections, to disperse unlawful and dangerous assemblages and assemblages which obstruct the free passage of public streets, sidewalks, parks, and other places, to preserve order at election and public meetings and assemblages, to regulate movements or teams and vehicles in the streets, and to prevent the violation of all laws and ordinances in force applicable to the police of said city. 
Sec. 26. - Powers relative to animals. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have power and authority to prevent horses, mules, cattle, and all other animals or fowls from running at large or being tied or tethered on streets or sidewalks in said city, and to prevent and prohibit the keeping of hogs within the city limits, or to regulate the manner in which they must be kept, and shall have power and authority to take up such animals or fowls and impound same, and to punish all owners of such animals and fowls who refuse to obey any ordinance passed by mayor and council carrying this authority into effect. 
Sec. 27. - Animal pound. 
Be it enacted, that, in order to give effect to the foregoing section, said mayor and council shall have authority to establish a pound and to change the same whenever they see proper; to fix a schedule of charges and penalties to be paid by the owner of such impounded animals before they are released from the pound; to regulate the mode and manner of sale or disposition of impounded animals or fowls where no owner appears or where payment of impounding fees charged, penalties, or cost is refused; to provide for the disposition of the proceeds of the sale of impounded animals and to provide for the punishment of all persons who, without authority, break or enter the pound. 
Sec. 28. - Ad valorem tax. 
For the purpose of raising revenues for the annual support and maintenance of the government of the City of Cumming, the City Council of Cumming shall select a board of tax assessors to be composed of three freeholders, who shall be citizens of said city and own real estate therein. Said board of tax assessors shall have the power and authority to annually assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal, including money, notes, bonds and other evidence of debt, money used in banking and every other species of property owned or held within the corporate limits of said city, which under the laws of this state is subject to taxation; said lists to specify the property by name, location and value. Said board shall have the power and authority to regulate the manner, form and time of making tax returns, tax lists or inventories and appraisements of property subject to taxation. They may adopt such measures and regulations, prescribe and enforce such penalties as they may deem advisable to secure due and prompt return and assessment of all property within the limits of said city and the collection of taxes thereon. They shall have power and authority to issue executions for taxes, and levy the same by the proper levying officer and bring the property levied on to sale at the time and place and manner provided for municipal sales for taxes or sheriff's sales for state and county taxes. They shall have further authority to provide for the redemption of such property. Provided, however, that the board shall give written notice to the owner of any change in assessment on any property and said owner shall have ten days after receipt of such notice to appear before the board and file protest to such reassessment. The compensation of the members of said board shall be fixed by the mayor and council of the City of Cumming. 
Sec. 29. - Authority to regulate amusements, businesses and nuisances. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to license and regulate theatrical exhibitions, merry-go-rounds, circuses, and shows of all kinds; drays, hacks, automobiles, trucks, auto-buggies, and vehicles of all kinds, as well as private vehicles; and also traveling venders of patent medicine, soaps, notions, and all articles, except such as are exempt by the laws of this State; also hotels, chain-stores, boarding-houses, restaurants, fish-stands, laundries, billiard, pool, and other kinds of tables, tenpins, shooting galleries, and bowling alleys, and all contrivances and devices for carrying on games; also barber-shops, livery stables, slaughter-houses, butcher-pens, tan yards, automobile repair-shops, black-smith shops, steam gins, sawmills, planing mills; also auctioneers, peddlers, and pawn-brokers; the sale of near beer and similar nonintoxicating beverages, and imitations or substitutes for beer or malt or other liquors; and all other classes of kinds of business within the police power of said city, and to fix the amount of the licenses therefor and collect the same; and also said city council shall likewise have power and authority to levy and collect a specific or occupation tax on all businesses, occupations, professions, callings, trades, or avocations, public or private, exercised within the city, as may be deemed just and proper; said city council may close up and prohibit entirely any business, factory, establishment, or place of business in the event the same becomes a nuisance or is dangerous or injurious to health of the people of said city. They shall have like power to remove or cause to be removed all dilapidated buildings or unsafe buildings, fences, chimneys, or structures of any kind which may be considered a nuisance or dangerous, and also to have excavations, dry wells, pits, and ditches filled when deemed expedient. 
In case of the removal by the authorities of the City of Cumming of any obstruction of any kind or character on any of the streets, lanes, alleys, ways, or sidewalks of said city, or in case of the removal or abatement of any nuisance of any kind, character, or description within said city, where the work of abatement or removal is done by said city, and wherein such of obstructions or nuisances the property owner or citizen responsible therefor shall have failed to remove the same after due notice and hearing provided by law, the costs of such work or removal or abatement shall be chargeable to the person responsible therefor or the owner of the property upon which the same exists, either or both, and such costs of removal or abatement shall be enforceable and collectible from such citizen or property owner by the issuance of an execution therefor, in the same manner that executions are issued for paving and street improvements, and shall be enforceable in the same manner as such executions, shall be subject to the same defenses and rules governing such executions issued for paving or street improvements, and shall have and be a lien of equal dignity and rank; provided, however, that in cases of sales of real or personal property under the executions herein provided, the full title thereto shall pass, there shall be no right of redemption by the owner, but such sale shall be final and conclusive and the purchaser thereat shall be vested with the full title to the property sold and entitled to immediate possession. 
Sec. 30. - Registration of business and license tax. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority by ordinance to classify and provide for registering the various occupations, trades, callings, and kinds of business that are carried on in said city, and to fix a specific or license tax on the same, and the time or times when such tax or license shall be payable, and shall provide penalties for engaging in the same without first registering and paying the tax; and shall also have power to enforce the collection of the same by execution. 
Sec. 31. - Depository for city funds. 
Be it further enacted, that the said city council shall upon qualifying for the term of office select and appoint a depository for all funds or monies belonging to the said City of Cumming, and in order to be valid such appointment shall be approved by a resolution of the council, or a majority of them, in meeting duly assembled, and said resolution shall be entered on the minutes of their proceedings. The clerk of said city shall, on every day except Sundays and legal holidays, deposit all money in his hands belonging to the city in said depository and file the record thereof. All monies or funds of the city so deposited in the city depository shall be checked out only upon vouchers signed by the city clerk, and countersigned by the mayor of said city, or such other councilman as may be designated by a resolution of the council in meeting duly assembled, and entered upon the minutes of their proceedings. 
Sec. 32. - Authority to require street duty; tax in lieu of street duty. 
Be it further enacted that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to require, compel, and make all persons, between the ages of twenty-one years and fifty years, subject to road duty under the laws of this State, resident in said city, to work on the streets of said city not to exceed eight days in each year, at such times as the city council may order; or to pay a commutation tax in lieu thereof, not to exceed four dollars in any one year, as said city council may determine. Should any person subject to work the streets of said city under this section fail or refuse to do so, or to pay the street tax assessed in lieu thereof, after having received due notice so to do from the chief of police or any member of the police force, he shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section, and on conviction in the municipal court of said city shall be fined in the sum not exceeding ten dollars, or be punished by imprisonment in the guard-house or by compulsory labor on the streets in the chain-gang of said city not exceeding twenty days. Thirty days continuous residence in the corporate limits of said city, shall be sufficient to constitute a person a resident of said city, so as to subject him to liability to street work. The city council may pass such ordinances as they deem proper and necessary for enforcing the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 33. - Bond issue for public improvements, etc. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to issue bonds for and in the name of said city for any of the following purposes, to wit: For building, equipping, and maintaining waterworks, sewers and electric light system for said city and laying water-mains and sewers, paving, macadamizing, repairing, and improving the public sidewalks, streets, highways, and lanes, alleys, and crossings of the city, and for the purpose of building a city hall and any other public building and works, and making any other public improvements that may be needed for said city. 
Before proceeding towards the issuing of bonds for any of the above named purposes, the city council shall prepare, or cause to be prepared by contract or otherwise, necessary plans, specifications, estimates of cost showing location, extent, cost and other information, all of which shall be on file and accessible to voters at least ten days before said bond election is to be held. The cost of preparing such plans, specifications and estimates of cost may be paid from current expense funds and/or from the proceeds of the bonds sold. 
Before any bonds of said city shall be issued for any of the foregoing purposes, the City Council of Cumming shall, by appropriate resolutions or ordinances direct and provide that such bonds, shall be issued, and shall specify the purpose and amount thereof, the rate of interest to be paid annually, and when to be fully paid off, the place of payment and other terms and details thereof, and shall also in said resolution or ordinance call and provide for the holding of any election on the subject for published notice thereof, as provided by the constitution and laws of this State. Such an election or elections may be called at any time or times, or from time to time, for issuing bonds for any one or more or all of the before-stated purposes, as deemed expedient by said council; provided, always, that the limits of the total bonded indebtedness of said city as fixed by the Constitution of the State, shall never be exceeded. Should the requisite number of qualified voters of said city, as prescribed by the Constitution and laws of the State, vote in favor of issuing bonds at any election called for by said city council as hereinbefore provided, then and in such event said city council shall, at any time before the time of issuing the bonds authorized by such election, provide for the assessment, levy, and collection, during the life of said bonds, of an annual tax upon all property in said city subject to taxation, sufficient in amount to pay the principal and interest of said bonds. Any and all of the bonds and series of bonds issued by said city under the provisions of this Charter shall become obligatory and binding upon said city and its taxpayers, with all the qualities of commercial paper; and said city council is hereby authorized to negotiate and sell any of said bonds or series of bonds issued by said city, and the proceeds of such bonds when sold shall only be applied for the purpose or purposes for which they were respectively issued. 
Sec. 34. - Sinking fund for bonds. 
Be it further enacted, that whenever any bonds are issued by said city, it shall be the duty of the city council of said city to provide a sinking-fund to pay off the principal and interest of such bonds or series of bonds at their maturity. 
Sec. 35. - Temporary borrowing. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority, when necessary to supply casual deficiencies in the revenues of said city, to negotiate a temporary loan or loans and execute a note or notes therefor in the name of said city, as may be provided by special resolution or ordinance for that purpose. 
Sec. 36. - Powers over public places. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have full, complete, and exclusive control of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, and squares of said city and shall have full power and authority to condemn property for the purpose of laying out new streets, alleys, or sidewalks, and for widening, straightening, and grading or in any way changing the street line and sidewalks of said city; and when said city council desires to exercise the power and authority as to condemnations herein granted, it may be done whether the land to be condemned is in the hands of owner, trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, or agent, and shall be done in the manner prescribed in sections 2506—6235, inclusive, of the Code of Georgia of 1910, and the Acts amendatory thereof. The city council may abandon or discontinue such proceeding at any time upon payment of accrued cost. 
(a)  Removal of obstructions, nuisances. The city council shall have full power and authority to remove or cause to be removed any building, steps, fence, trees, gates, or other obstruction or nuisance in the street, alley, lane, sidewalk, or other public places in said city, and to enforce the provisions of this section by appropriate ordinance, and assess the costs of same as hereinbefore provided. 
(1)  Street improvements. The City Council of Cumming is hereby authorized and empowered to establish and change the grade of any streets, avenues, alleys, ways, lanes and other public places in the City of Cumming and to improve the same by paving, macadamizing and draining the same, whenever in its judgment the public convenience and welfare may require such improvements, subject to the limitation prescribed in this Act. 
(2)  Resolutions. Wherever the said city council shall deem it necessary to grade, pave, macadamize, drain, or otherwise improve any street, avenue, alley, way, lane, or any part thereof, within the limits of the City of Cumming, said city council shall by resolution declare such work or improvement necessary to be done, and such resolution shall be published in two (2) consecutive issues of a weekly newspaper published and having a general circulation in the City of Cumming; and if a majority of the owners of the land liable to assessment to pay for such improvements of any such highway shall not, within fifteen (15) days after the last publication of such resolutions, file with the clerk of said city their protest in writing against such improvement, then said city council shall have power to cause said improvement to be made, and to contract therefor, and to levy assessments or liens provided for. Any number of streets, avenues, alleys, ways, lanes, or other public places or parts thereof to be so improved may be included in one resolution, but any protest or objection shall be made as to each street or other highway separately; provided, however, that if a majority of the owners of the land liable to assessment for any such improvement shall petition the city council for such improvement of any street or part of street, alley, way, lane, or avenue, or other public place, describing in such petition the character of the improvement desired, the width of the same, and the materials preferred by the petitioners for such improvements, it shall thereupon be the duty of said city council to promptly cause the said improvements to be made in accordance with the prayer of said petition, and in such case the resolution hereinbefore mentioned shall not be required. 
(3)  Costs. The lots, pieces, or parcels of land fronting and abutting upon both sides of said improvements shall be charged with the cost thereof according to the just pro rata of the entire cost of said improvement; provided that the frontage of intersecting streets, ways, avenues, lanes, or alleys shall be assessed as real estate abutting upon the street, lane, alley, way, or avenue paved or otherwise improved, and the cost of such improvements at intersections shall be added to and become a part of the total cost of the improvements and be paid for pro rata based on the front footage of property abutting the improvements. 
(4)  Ordinances. Whenever the petition provided for in paragraph three of this section is presented, or when the said city council shall have determined to pave or improve any street, avenue, lane, alley, way, or other public place, and shall have passed the resolution provided for in said paragraph three of this section, the said city council shall then have the power to enact all ordinances and to establish all rules and regulations as may be necessary to require the owners of all property subject to assessment to pay the cost of such improvements, and to cause to be put in and constructed all water or sewer pipe connections to connect with any existing water or sewer pipes in and underneath the streets, avenues, lanes, alleys, and ways and other public places where such improvements are to be made, and all costs and expenses for making such connections shall be taxed against such property and shall be included and made a part of the general assessment to cover the cost of such improvements, in addition to the basis of said lineal-foot frontage, if so determined by the appraisers hereinafter provided for. 
(5)  Letting of contract. After the expiration of the time for objection or protest on the part of the property owners, if no sufficient protest be filed, or on receipt of a petition for such improvement signed by a majority of the owners of the land to be assessed, if such petition shall be found to be in proper form and properly executed, the said city council shall adopt a resolution reciting that no such protest has been filed, or the filing of such petition, as the case may be, and expressing the determination of said city council to proceed with the said improvement, stating the material to be used, and the manner of construction, and defining the extent, character, and width of improvements, and other such matters as may be necessary, to instruct the clerk of said city in the performance of his duties in preparing for such improvements the necessary plans, plots, profiles, specifications, and estimates. Said resolution shall set forth any and all such reasonable terms and conditions as said city council shall deem proper to impose with reference to the letting of the contract and the provisions thereof; and the said city council shall by said resolution provide that the contractor shall execute to the city a good and sufficient bond in an amount to be stated in such resolution, conditioned for the full and faithful performance of the work and the performance of the contract, and for the protection of the city and all property owners interested against any loss or damage by reason of the negligence or improper execution of the work, and may require a bond in the amount to be stated in such resolution for the maintenance of good condition of such improvement for a period of not less than five (5) years from the time of its completion or both, in the discretion of said city council. Said resolution shall also direct the city clerk of said city to invite sealed proposals for furnishing the materials and performing the work necessary in making such improvements. The notice of such proposals shall state the street, streets, or other public places to be improved, the kind of improvements proposed, what, if any, bond or bonds will be required to be executed by the contractor aforesaid, and shall state the time when and the place where such proposals shall be filed and when and where the same will be considered by said city council. Said notice shall be posted at the city hall and county courthouse and/or published in two (2) consecutive issues of a weekly newspaper of general circulation in the City of Cumming. At the time and place specified in such notice the city council shall examine all bids received, and without unnecessary delay award the contract to the lowest and best bidder who will perform the work and furnish the materials which may be selected and perform all the conditions imposed by said city council as prescribed in such resolution and notice for proposals, which contract shall in no case exceed the estimate of cost submitted by the city clerk with the plans and specifications; and the said city council shall have the right to reject any and all bids and readvertise for other bids when any such bids are not in its judgment satisfactory. 
(6)  Appraisement; objections; hearing; assessment. As soon as the said contract is let and the cost of such improvement, which shall also include all other expenses incurred by the city incident to said improvements in addition to the contract price for the work and materials, is ascertained, the said city council shall by resolution appoint a board of appraisers consisting of the mayor, the city clerk, and the chairman of the board of tax assessors, to appraise and apportion the cost and expenses of the same to the several tracts of land abutting on said improvement as hereinbefore provided. Within ten (10) days from the resolution appointing said board of appraisers, the said board of appraisers shall file a written report of the appraisal and assessment and apportionment of such expenses and cost to the several lots and tracts of land abutting on said street, alley, lane, way, or avenue or other public places so improved, with the city clerk in the manner and on the basis herein provided. When said report shall have been returned and filed, the said city council shall appoint a time for the holding of a session of the city council or shall designate a regular meeting of the city council for the hearing of any complaint or objections that may be made concerning the said appraisement, apportionment, and assessment as to any such lots or tracts of land abutting on said improvement, and notice of such session for the said hearing shall be published by the said clerk in at least two (2) consecutive issues of any weekly newspaper of general circulation in the City of Cumming, and said notice shall provide for the inspection of such return by any property owner or other party interested in such return. The time fixed for said hearing shall not be less than five (5) or more than ten (10) days from the last publication. The said city council at said session shall have power to review and correct said appraisement, apportionment, and assessment, and to hear objections to the same and to confirm the same either as made by said board of appraisers or as corrected by said council. Assessment in conformity to said appraisement and apportionment shall be payable in ten (10) equal installments, and shall bear interest at the rate of not exceeding seven percent (7%) per annum until paid, payable in each year at such time as the several installments in accordance with said appraisement and apportionment as so confirmed against the several tracts of land liable therefor; provided, however, that the rate of interest to be taxed shall not exceed one percent (1%) over and above the rate of interest stipulated in the bonds herein provided for. 
(7)  Installment payments. The first installment of said assessments, together with interest to that date upon the whole, shall be due and payable on the first day of September next succeeding the passage of said ordinance, and one installment with the yearly interest upon the amounts remaining unpaid shall be payable on the first day of September in each succeeding year until all shall be paid; provided, that if such assessing ordinance shall be passed after the first day of August in each year, the first installment of such assessment and interest shall be due and payable on October 1st of the following year. Said ordinance shall also provide that the owners of the property so assessed shall have the privilege of paying the amounts of their respective assessments within thirty (30) days from the date of passage of said ordinance. The owners of the property so assessed shall be allowed to make payment of their respective assessments without interest, within said period of thirty (30) days, to the treasurer of the City of Cumming, and receive their [there] the lien of said assessment, which money so paid to the said treasurer shall be distributed pro rata between the contractor and the city in proportion to the respective interests. 
(8)  Lien of assessment. Such special assessments and each installment thereof, and the interest thereon, are hereby declared to be a lien against the lots and tracts of land so assessed from the date of the ordinance levying the same, coequal with the lien of other taxes and prior to and superior to all other liens against such lots or tracts, and such lien shall continue until such assessment and interest thereon shall be fully paid, but unmatured installments shall not be deemed to be within the terms of any general covenant or warranty. 
(9)  Street improvement bonds. The said city council, after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the passage of said ordinance confirming and levying said assessment, shall by resolution provide for the issuance of bonds in the aggregate amount of such assessment remaining unpaid, bearing date fifteen (15) days after the passage of the ordinance levying the said assessments, and of such denominations as the said city council may determine, which bond or bonds shall in no event become a liability of the city council of the City of Cumming issuing same. One tenth in the amount of any such series of bonds, with the interest upon the whole series to date, shall be payable on the fifteenth day of October next succeeding year until all shall be paid. Such bonds shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding six percent (6%) per annum from their date until maturity, payable annually, and shall be designated as "street improvement bonds," and shall on the face thereof recite the street or streets or part of streets or other public places for the improvements of which they have been issued, and that they are payable solely from assessments which have been levied upon the lots and tracts of land benefited by said improvements under authority of this Act. Said bonds shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city, and shall have the impression of the corporate seal of such city thereon, and shall have interest coupons attached; and all bonds issued by authority of this Act shall be payable at such place, either within or without the State of Georgia, as shall be sold at not less than par, and the proceeds thereof applied to the payment of the contract price and other expenses, by the said city council, or such bonds in the amount that shall be necessary for that purpose may be turned over and delivered to the contractor at par value in payment of the amount due him on his contract, and the portion thereof which shall be necessary to pay other expenses incident to and incurred in providing for said improvements, shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as the said city council shall direct. Said bonds shall be registered by the clerk of the city in a book to be provided for that purpose, and certificates of registration by said clerk shall be endorsed upon each of said bonds. 
(10)  Collection of assessments. The assessments provided for and levied under the provisions of this Act shall be payable by the person owning said lots or tracts of land as the several installments become due, together with the interest thereon, to the treasurer of Cumming, who shall give the proper receipts for such payments. It shall be the duty of the treasurer to keep an accurate account of all such collections by him made, and such collections shall be kept in special fund to be used and applied for the payment of such bonds and the interest thereon and the expenses incurred thereto, and for no other purposes. It shall be the duty of said treasurer or clerk of the city, not less than thirty (30) days and not more than forty (40) days before the maturity of any installment of such assessments, to publish, in two (2) consecutive issues of a weekly newspaper published in the City of Cumming and having a general circulation in said city, a notice advising the owner of the property affected by such assessment of the date when such installment and interest will be due, and designating the street, or streets, or other public places for the improvement of which such assessments have been levied, and that unless the same shall be promptly paid proceeding will be taken to collect said installment and interest; and it shall be the duty of said treasurer promptly after the date of the maturity of any such installment or assessment and interest and on or before the fifteenth day of October of each year, in case of a default of payment of any such installment or assessment with interest, to issue an execution against the lot or tract of land assessed for such improvement, or against the party or person owning the same, for the amount of such assessment with interest, and shall turn over the same to the marshal or chief of police of the City of Cumming or his deputy, who shall levy the same upon the adjoining real estate liable for such assessment and previously assessed for such improvement; and after advertisement and other proceedings as in case of sales for city taxes, the same shall be sold at public outcry to the highest bidder, and such sales shall vest an absolute title in the purchaser, subject to the lien of the remaining unpaid installment with interest, and also subject to the right of redemption so provided in sections 880, 1169, 1170, 1172 of the Code of Georgia of 1910; provided that the defendant shall have the right to file an affidavit denying that the whole or any part of the amount for which said execution is due, and stating what amounts he admits to be due, which amount so admitted to be due shall be paid or collected before the affidavit is received, and the affidavit received for the balance. All affidavits shall set out in detail the reasons why the affidavit claims the amount is not due, and, when received by the city marshal or chief of police, shall be returned to the superior court of Forsyth County, Georgia, and there shall be tried and the issue determined as in cases of illegality, subject to all the pains and penalties provided for in cases of illegality for delay under the Code of Georgia. The failure of the said treasurer or clerk to publish said notice of maturity of an installment of said assessment and interest shall in no wise affect the validity of the assessment and interest and the execution issued therefor. 
(11)  Suit to set aside or enjoin assessment; reassessment. No suit shall be sustained to set aside any such assessment or to enjoin the said city council from making any such assessment or levying or collecting any such assessments, or issuing such bonds or providing for their payment as herein authorized, or contesting the validity thereof, on any ground or for any reason other than for the failure of the city council to adopt and publish the preliminary resolution provided for in paragraph two of this section in cases requiring such resolution and its publication, and to give the notice of the hearing of the return of the appraisers as herein provided for, unless suit shall be commenced within sixty (60) days after the passage of the ordinance making such final assessments; provided, that in the event any special assessments, shall be found to be invalid or insufficient in whole or in part for any reason whatsoever, the said city council may at any time, in the manner provided for the levying of an original assessment, proceed to cause an assessment to be made and levied, which shall have like force and effect as an original assessment. 
(12)  Street improvements. In all cases where the said city council shall deem it necessary to repave, redrain, remacadamize, or otherwise improve any street, alley, avenue, lane, way, or other public place, which has been paved or improved prior to the passage of this law, or which shall have been heretofore paved, macadamized, or drained under the provisions of this Act, such pavement or improvement is hereby authorized to be done under and in pursuance of the provisions of this Act, and in such cases all provisions of this Act providing for making such improvements and levying assessments therefor and the issuance of bonds shall apply; provided, that in the judgment of said city council of said city the pavement is worn out and no longer serviceable. 
(13)  Assessment of public property. Whenever the abutting landowners of any street, alley, way, avenue, or lane of said city petition the said city council as herein set out, or said city council pass the resolution provided for in paragraph two of this section, for the pavement of any street, avenue, alley, way, or lane, or other public places, where the State or any of the political subdivisions is the owner of the property on said street, the frontage so owned is to be counted as if owned by an individual and shall be likewise treated for purposes of assessment; and where the state is the owner of the property, the governor is authorized to sign any petition provided for in this Act for and in behalf of the state, and where the county is the owner the chairman of the Board of County Commissioners of Forsyth County is authorized to sign in behalf of the county; and where the City of Cumming is the owner, the mayor of Cumming is authorized to sign in behalf of the city. That the provisions of this section shall in nowise annul and void the other provisions under this Charter of the City of Cumming in reference to paving within the City of Cumming, but the same shall be in addition to such provisions for the paving within said city and in all cases where street paving or repairing is contemplated on any street or highway in the city, in which mains, sewers, pipes, or electric wiring pipes are laid, or are to be laid, the city shall have the power to extend such mains, sewers, pipes, or electric wiring pipes from the main line to the property line to thereafter avoid the necessity of tearing up the paving, to make house connections, and to assess and collect the cost of making such property line extension against the property to which said assessments as the same are assessed in cases of street paving. 
(1953 Ga. Laws (Jan.—Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 411), page 3001, § 4) 
Sec. 37. - Condemnation of realty. 
The City Council of Cumming, in the name of the city, shall have full power and authority for or to condemn any land, pond, lake, dam, stream, or premises within or without the corporate limits of the City of Cumming whether private, public, or semipublic, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a system of waterworks, sewerage, and electric lights, or any of them, for said city, or for the purpose of maintaining, extending, enlarging, or improving them or any form of them; or for any other corporate use or purpose; and for either or all of said purposes; provided, however, that whenever the right to condemn such lands, pond, lake, dam, stream, or premises herein granted to be exercised, all proceedings in respect thereto shall be under the same terms and conditions as provided for in the general laws of this State with reference to the condemnation of private property for public use, as contained in article 1, chapter 9, of the Code of Georgia of 1910, beginning with section 5206 thereof, and embracing all sections following the same having reference to condemnation of private property for public use, and as provided by Act amendatory thereof, and such other provisions of the Constitution and general laws of the State as may be applicable thereto. 
Sec. 38. - Budget; audits. 
The said city council shall arrange a fiscal year for said city, and shall adopt a budget system of finance for said city; and at the end of each fiscal year the books and fiscal affairs of said city shall be audited by a certified public accountant who shall be selected by the city council; provided, however, that no member of said city council shall be eligible to make such audit and a new budget prepared for the ensuing fiscal year and the same shall be strictly adhered to under personal penalty on the part of said city council for any additional expenditures not carried therein; a copy of said audit and budget shall be spread on the minutes of said city council, and a copy thereof shall be published in the official organ of said city, said city council being hereby directed to select some paper in Forsyth County for the official organ of said city. 
(1953 Ga. Laws (Act No. 411), page 3001, § 3) 
Sec. 39. - Traffic and vehicles. 
Be it further enacted that the City Council of Cumming shall have the power and authority to regulate by ordinance the speed at which automobiles, bicycles, and other vehicles of any description shall be driven through the streets, alleys, or public places of said city, and to prohibit the use of the public sidewalks of said city by other than pedestrians, and to regulate the size and weight of any truck, bus, or other vehicle driven on the streets of said city, and to punish violators of such rules, regulations, or ordinances as they may pass on the subject embraced in this section. 
Sec. 40. - Franchises and easements. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to grant franchises, easements and rights-of-way over, in, under, on, or along the public streets, lanes, sidewalks, alleys, parks, and other property of said city, on such terms and conditions as they may fix by ordinance. And shall likewise have the right to regulate by ordinance or resolution any and all public service or utility corporations doing business in said city, in any manner not in conflict with the laws of Georgia or the United States. 
Sec. 41. - Sewers and drains. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have full and absolute power and authority to control by ordinance all city pipes, sewers, and drains, private drains, water-closets, privies, and the like in said city, and to prescribe their location, structure, and use, and to make rules and regulations and to pass such ordinances concerning them or their use, in all particulars, as may be deemed best for the preservation of the health and comfort of the inhabitants of said city. 
Sec. 42. - Sewers. 
The City of Cumming, acting by and through its mayor and council, is hereby vested with full power and authority to establish, equip, maintain, modify, extend, and improve the system of sewerage and drains in said City of Cumming and assess any and all costs of the building, equipment, and maintenance of such sewerage and drains as may hereinafter be put in along the streets, alleys, or ways of said city against the abutting property and the owners thereof, according to the proportion that such abutting property bears to the entire cost of such sewerage thus put down, and also to provide for the enforcement and collection of such assessments against the abutting property and owners thereof by execution issued against such property and such owners. Said mayor and council shall have all power and authority to adopt by ordinance such system of equalizing assessments on real estate for the purpose above stated, as may be just and proper, estimating the total cost of each improvement thus made, and prorating the costs thereof on the abutting real estate and the owners thereof, according to the proportion such abutting real estate bears to the whole costs of said improvements thus made, or according to the area or value of said real estate, either or all, as may be determined by ordinance. The amount of the assessment on each piece of real estate shall be a lien on such real estate against the owner thereof, from the date of the passage of the ordinance providing for the work and making assessment, and said mayor and council shall have full power and authority to enforce the collection of any assessment so made for such work or improvement upon the streets, ways, and alleys of said city, by execution issued by the city clerk against the real estate so assessed, and the owner thereof, for the amount assessed against the owner at the date of the ordinance making such assessment; which execution may be levied by the chief of police or the city marshal of said city on such real estate or other property owner by the owner thereof; and after advertising and other proceedings as in the case of tax sales under existing ordinances, or such as may hereafter be made as applicable to the subject, said property shall be sold in the same manner and shall be subject to all the rights of purchase by the city and redemption by the owners as herein provided; provided, that all advertisements may be made in the official organ of said city, and provided, to any execution issued under provisions of this section the defendant shall have the right to file an affidavit of illegality in the same manner as is provided for the filing of affidavits of illegality to common-law judgments under the practice of the superior courts of said State, denying the whole or any part of the amount for which execution issued is due, and the reason why the same is not due, but any amount admitted to be due shall be paid before the affidavit of illegality is received, and said affidavit shall be received for the balance; and said affidavit so received, if filed to a levy upon personal property, shall be returnable for trial to the justice's court of the 879 district G. M., said County of Forsyth, when the principal amount of execution thus levied upon personalty does not exceed one hundred dollars, or, if levy upon real estate, then to the Superior Court of Forsyth County, Georgia, and there tried, and the issues determined as in cases of illegality, subject to all the pains and penalties provided for under cases of illegalities filed for delay. The lien for such assessments and the execution issued thereon on abutting property for such sewerage or drainage improvements, shall have the rank and priority of payment next in point of dignity to liens for taxes, as provided by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and the United States, and shall have priority over all executions and judgments and liens, such liens to date from the passage of the ordinance authorizing the execution of the work in each case. Said mayor and council shall have the power and authority to prescribe by ordinance such rules as they may in their discretion think necessary to establish, maintain, modify, extend and improve the system of sewerage and drains, or either, in said city, and assess any or all of the costs or expense against abutting property, and enforce by execution the collection thereof against the abutting property and the owners thereof, and to prescribe by ordinance such notices to the abutting property owners as said mayor and council may see proper; provided, however, that such notice shall be in writing referring to the improvements thus to be made, and it shall be served upon the abutting property owners at least fifteen days prior to the beginning of the improvement adjacent to such abutting property, which notice shall be served in person or left at the residence of such owner if a resident of said city, and if a nonresident then by due course of mail by letter addressed to such owner's last known address. Said mayor and council shall have the authority, in the name of said city, to issue executions for the full assessments against the abutting property and the owners thereof for all such sewerage or drainage improvements, and shall have authority to issue sewerage or drainage certificates, either or both, in the name of the city, in behalf of or payable to the sewerage or drainage contractor, or any other person, corporation, or concern, which certificates shall be made negotiable, and shall be issued in such denominations and payable at such times either for one year or for more than one year, in the discretion of council, to bear such rate of interest as may be determined by the council, interest to be payable annually or semiannually, and to be based upon executions issued against the abutting property and the owners thereof for such sewerage or drainage improvements aforesaid, and the City of Cumming shall have authority by its mayor and clerk, upon proper resolution adopted by council authorizing them so to do, to endorse such certificates, and guarantee the payment thereof, and shall have authority to negotiate such certificates, when issued, to contractor or contractors of such improvements, or parties furnishing material therefor, in settlement of such improvement, labor, or material, or to negotiate them to banks, trust companies, or other persons or parties having money to lend, and raise the money for purpose of paying for such improvements, and said city shall have authority to collect assessments for such improvements under such executions as may be issued by authority of said city, and use the money for the purpose of redeeming such certificates thus issued, and to prescribe the terms, the payment, rates of interest, and the time of payment of such executions and of such sewerage or drainage-improvements certificates either or both. Said city through its mayor and council shall have all other and necessary authority to fully establish, equip, maintain, extend, and improve either or all the system of sewerage and drains in said city, and to make assessments against the abutting property owners, issue executions thereon with special liens, and to provide the manner and form of enforcing the collection thereof, and all other necessary or desirable authority for successfully carrying out such sewerage or drainage improvements. 
Sec. 43. - Nuisances. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have full power and authority to declare what shall be deemed a nuisance in said city, and to provide for the abatement of the same. The municipal court of said city shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the city council with respect to the trial and abatement of nuisances in said city. 
Sec. 44. - Waterworks, electric lights. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have full power and authority to own, construct, extend, enlarge, operate, and maintain for municipal purposes and for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of said city, and for profit, a system of waterworks and a system of electric lights, whenever they may consider it expedient, to make rules and regulations regarding the use of same, and fixing prices and rates. 
Sec. 45. - Building regulations; fire district. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to adopt any and all ordinances, rules and regulations necessary to lay out a fire district in said city, and to enlarge, change, and modify the same from time to time; to prescribe how and of what material buildings within said district may be constructed and erected, how thick walls shall be, the manner in which chimney flues, and stove pipes shall be constructed; and to make such rules, regulations, and requirements as they may deem necessary to so far as possible protect said city from fire or to prevent or stop conflagration. 
Sec. 46. - Fire department. 
Be it further enacted, that it shall be the duty of the City Council of Cumming, to provide such fire protection for said city as in their discretion said city can afford, or is able to support, and to this end shall have power and authority to organize, equip, and support a fire department, volunteer or paid, and to make such appropriations therefor as may be deemed advisable, providing needed buildings and equipment therefor; and to adopt and prescribe such ordinances and regulations as will best promote the objects of this section and afford protection from fire or conflagration to property in said city. 
Sec. 47. - Public health. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to make and enforce all ordinances necessary and precautionary for the prevention of any contagious or infectious disease or the spreading or communicating thereof; to declare, maintain, and enforce quarantine rules and regulations in regard thereto, and to punish any violations of any of said rules or regulations. They shall have power to build or establish or maintain and exercise police powers, offer a pest-house within or without the limits of said city; and for this purpose they are authorized to buy, hold, rent or receive real estate or buildings beyond or within the limits of said city. They shall have power to compel the removal to the pest-house of any person or persons who have smallpox or other contagious or infectious diseases, when in their wise and humane judgment it is best for the general welfare and health of said city. They shall have power to compel all persons in said city, whether residents or sojourners to be vaccinated, and may provide vaccine virus and employ physicians at the expense of said city to vaccinate all persons who are unable to procure vaccination, and may by ordinance provide punishment for persons failing or refusing to be vaccinated; and in the same manner provide for inoculation against typhoid fever and other diseases. Said mayor and council shall have authority in their discretion to establish and put in operation a board of health to function in all manner as is usual to a board of health, to pass ordinances and regulations prescribing penalties for violation of same. 
Sec. 48. - Parks. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to their discretion to acquire by gift, purchase, or otherwise, on behalf of said city, land or ground suitable for a park or parks for the use of the public and as may be in their judgment to the health, interest, and welfare of the citizens of said city. They shall have power and authority to improve, beautify, and keep up the same, and to this end may make appropriations therefor, and to provide such officers or employees as may be necessary to care for, protect, and keep the same in order. 
Sec. 49. - Trees in public places. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to adopt and enforce ordinances for the protection and preservation of shade-trees on the streets, public places, and parks in said city, and to prevent the cutting, impairing and mutilating thereof by telephone or telegraph companies or employees or by other persons unless the same is done under and with the express and formal consent of the city council or some officer appointed by them to direct the same, and then only when absolutely necessary. 
Sec. 50. - Purchases. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall prescribe by ordinance how and by whom purchases for supplies, materials, and other necessary articles for said city and any department thereof shall be made or contracted in behalf of said city, and no purchase made in any other manner or by any other person than as prescribed in such ordinance shall be valid or binding on said city. 
Any purchase of minor maintenance equipment shall not require advertisement but any purchase or sale of capital equipment or property or any purchase or sale for capital improvement shall be made by written bid and shall be advertised for at least two weeks prior to such purchase or sale in the official organ of the city. 
(1953 Ga. Laws (Jan.—Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 411), page 3001, § 5) 
Sec. 51. - Official malfeasance or nonfeasance. 
Be it further enacted that in case the mayor or any councilman while in office shall be guilty of malpractice or willful neglect of duty in office, or the abuse of the powers conferred upon him, or shall be guilty of any conduct unbecoming his station or convicted and sentenced of violating the criminal law of the state, involving moral turpitude, he shall be subject to be impeached by the city council, or by the alderman composing the council in case of the mayor and upon conviction by not less than three (3) votes shall be removed from office. 
Sec. 52. - Lewd and disorderly conduct. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming, shall have power and authority to remove inmates or occupants or lewd or disorderly houses in the City of Cumming, and they shall have power and authority to provide by ordinance a penalty for the use of profane, vulgar, or obscene language, and to punish lewd and disorderly conduct within the limits of said city, and to pass all ordinances that they may consider necessary for the peace and good order, health, prosperity, comfort, and securing of said city and the inhabitants thereof. 
Sec. 53. - Status of existing ordinances, bylaws, etc. 
Be it further enacted, that all ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations heretofore adopted by the mayor and council of the Town of Cumming, which are now in force and not inconsistent with, or repugnant to any provision of this Act shall remain in full force and effect under this Charter until repealed, altered, or amended by the City Council of Cumming. 
Sec. 54. - Recitals in deeds. 
Be it further enacted, that the recitals in deeds, under a sale for municipal taxes or assessments in said city shall be evidence of the facts as recited, in any court in this State, and shall be taken as prima facie true. 
Sec. 55. - Ordinance codification. 
Be it further enacted, that the City Council of Cumming shall have power and authority to adopt a code of ordinances, and to amend and repeal the same or any part thereof. 
Sec. 56. - Severability. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if for any reason any section, provision, clause, sentence, phrase, word, or any part of this Act shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, then that fact shall not affect or destroy the validity or constitutionality of any other section, provision, clause, or part of this Act which is not in and of itself unconstitutional or invalid, and the remaining portions of this Act shall be enforced without regard to the provision, clause, or part so held to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 57. - Powers not enumerated. 
Be it further enacted, that the enumeration of powers contained in this Act shall not be considered as restrictive; but the City Council of Cumming and the authorities of said city may exercise all powers, rights, and jurisdictions as they might if such enumeration were not made, and the city council may pass all laws, and ordinances, rules, and regulations that they may deem needful and proper for the general welfare and protection of said city; and where under this Charter rights are conferred or powers granted, but the manner of exercising them is not fully defined, the city council may prescribe additional regulations and modes of procedure, not repugnant to the interests and purposes of this Act or the laws of this state. 
Sec. 57A. - Water service outside city. 
(a)  The governing authority of the City of Cumming shall have the power and authority to expend city funds to construct and maintain water and sewer lines and to sell water and provide sewer service within the city limits and within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the city limits and West along Kelley Mill Road, a 300-foot strip either side of Kelley Mill Road to Kelley Creek; thence Northerly along the city limits of Cumming, Georgia, to County Road 374; thence Westerly to the junction of County Road 328 and Chamblee Gap Road; thence Northwesterly along Chamblee Gap Road including a 300 foot strip along the Southwest side of Chamblee Gap Road to the first branch of Kelley Creek; thence Northerly along the West boundary of GMD 879 to State Route 20; thence a 300-foot strip along the Southerly side of State Route 20 Westerly to County Road S2348, also including Mountain Valley Subdivision on Southwest side of State Route 20; thence Southerly along County Road S2348 continuing the 300-foot strip to Chamblee Gap Road including all those homes fronting Brookfield Circle; thence a 300-foot strip on the West side of County Road S2348 Northerly to County Road 326, thence Westerly on the North Side and West Side of County Road 326 to the intersection of Chamblee Gap Road; thence Northerly along Chamblee Gap Road with a 300-foot strip on the Eastern side to the intersection of State Route 20; thence commencing at State Route 20 and running Southerly with a 300-foot strip on the West side of Chamblee Gap Road to the intersection of County Road 326 then Northerly and Easterly with a 300-foot strip on the East side of County Road 326; thence Westerly along State Route 20 continuing the 300 foot strip on the South side of State Route 20 to the Cherokee County Line; thence Easterly along State Route 20 continuing a 300-foot strip along the North side of State Route 20 to Doc Sams Road; thence continuing the 300-foot strip on the West side of Doc Sams Road Northerly to County Road 25, including any subdivisions served by an existing 6 Prime line adjacent to the West side of Doc Sams Road; thence continuing the 300-foot strip on the Easterly side of Doc Sams Road Southerly along Doc Sams Road to State Route 20 including those homes fronting County Road 464 and Evergreen Valley N.W. S/D, and any other subdivisions adjacent to the East side of Doc Sams Road served by an existing 6 Prime line; thence continuing a 300-foot strip on the North side of State Route 20 Easterly to Friendship Circle, continuing a 300-foot strip along the Northern side of Friendship Circle including all that property between Friendship Circle and State Route 20, back to State Route 20 continuing a 300-foot strip on the North side of State Route 20 Easterly to County Road 277, continuing a 300 foot strip on the Westerly side of County Road 277 Northerly to Dr. Bramblett Highway; thence a 300-foot strip on the Easterly side of Dr. Bramblett Highway back to State Route 20, including all that property between County Road 277, Dr. Bramblett Highway and State Route 20, as well as County Road P518; thence continuing the 300-foot strip on the Northeastern side of State Route 20 Southeasterly to State Route 306; thence a 300-foot strip on the Northerly side of State Route 306 Easterly to County Road 201 including all that property between GMD 879, Chamblee Gap Road, State Route 20, State Route 306, County Road 374 and the City Limits of the City of Cumming, Georgia; thence Northerly along Bettes Gap/Tribble Gap Road to Timberland Heights, N.W. Subdivision including all homes fronting existing subdivision roads; thence continuing Easterly from the first branch of Sawnee Creek North of State Route 306 to Sawnee Creek; thence to the City Limits of the City of Cumming, Georgia and State Route 9; thence continuing a 300-foot strip on the Westerly side of State Route 9, Northerly to State Route 369 including a 300-foot strip either side of Spot Road from State Route 9 Westerly to County Road 280; thence Southerly on County Road 280 and take the entire road East along County Road 560 the entire road 300 feet both sides, County Road 199 and Hammond Drive both sides of road then coming back to Spot Road down Spot Road to County Road 197 North on County Road 197 300 feet on both sides until it intersects with State Route 369; thence Easterly on State Route 369 to the intersection of Highway 9 with a 300-foot strip on the South side of this road; thence a 300-foot strip on the Easterly side of State Route 9 Southerly from State Route 369 to Sawnee Creek and the city limits of the City of Cumming, Georgia including all those City Limits North of shopping area, North of Pilgrim Road and South of Pilgrim Road and a 300-foot strip either side of Pilgrim Road from State Route 9 Easterly a distance of approximately 2,000 feet, including existing 6 Prime line leading off South side of Pilgrim Road; thence Easterly from S.R.9 the city limits of the City of Cumming, Georgia, to an intersection of Pilgrim Mill Road and the city limits of Cumming, Georgia; thence a 300 foot strip on the Northerly side of Pilgrim Mill Road, Northeasterly to near Bald Ridge Creek at the City of Cumming/Forsyth County water meter; thence a 300-foot strip on the Southerly side of Pilgrim Mill Road Southwesterly to the Eastern City Limits of Cumming, Georgia; thence South along the Eastern City Limits of Cumming, Georgia, to an intersection with U.S. 19 (Ga. 400); thence Northeasterly along U.S. 19 (Ga. 400) to Bald Ridge Creek including all that property directly fronting U.S. 19 (Ga. 400); thence South and Easterly along the South and West side of Bald Ridge Creek and Lake Lanier to the Sawnee Public Access Area and Buford Dam Road; thence Northwesterly along Buford Dam Road to an intersection with Samples Road; thence a 300-foot strip on the Southerly side of Samples Road Southwesterly to State Route 20; thence Southeasterly along State Route 20 a 300-foot strip either side of State Route 20 from the intersection of Samples Road to Twin Branches Road; thence continuing Northwest-ward from Samples Road, a 300 foot strip along the Westerly side of State Route 20 from Samples Road to State Route 9; thence Westerly a 300 foot strip along the Southerly side of State Route 9 to Hutchinson Road; thence Northwesterly along Hutchinson Road to Castleberry Road; thence Easterly along Castleberry Road to the City Limits of Cumming, Georgia; thence along the Westerly limits of the City of Cumming, Georgia to the point of beginning at Kelley Road including all that property bounded by The City of Cumming, Castleberry Road, Hutchinson Road, State Route 9, State Route 20, Samples Road, including Mashburn School 300 feet each side of the road entering and leaving this school; thence back to Samples Road, then to Buford Dam Road, to the Sawnee Public Access Area, Southwesterly side of Lake Lanier and Bald Ridge Creek to U.S. 19 (Ga. 400) and thence to the Eastern limits of the City of Cumming and a 300 foot strip on the Northwesterly side of Castleberry Road from Hutchinson Road to Piney Grove Road, a 300-foot strip on the Southwesterly side of Piney Grove Road from Castleberry Road to State Route 9 including those homes fronting County Roads P483, 329, 330 and Joe Drive; thence a 300 foot strip either side of State Route 9 Southwesterly from Piney Grove Road to County Road 384; thence a 300-foot strip on the Northeasterly side of State Route 9 from Piney Grove Road Northeasterly to Hutchinson Road. That area bounded by Hutchinson Road, State Route 9, Piney Grove Road and Castleberry Road with the exception of homes fronting those roads, shall be considered outside of the Cumming Water System Boundary Limits. Also included without enlarging the boundary limits provided for herein, is the right to continue to serve existing lines not set forth herein to the extent of allowing for the maintenance and operation and collection of fees from said lines and any new service taps along said lines. Said service taps not to exceed 300 feet in length. 
(b)  As used in subsection (a) of this section, references to the city limits of the City of Cumming refer to the city limits as the same existed on March 1, 1987. 
(c)  In addition to the area described in subsection (a) of this section, the city shall have the power and authority to expend city funds to construct and maintain water and sewer lines and to sell water and provide sewer service outside the described area if the city and the affected political subdivision first enter into an intergovernmental contract for the provision of services as provided in article IX, section III, paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. The powers of the city, the areas to be served, and other such details shall be as provided in such contracts. 
(d)  In the absence of a valid, effective intergovernmental contract, whether such absence results from a failure to agree, a breach of contract, noncompliance by a party, a judicial ruling, or otherwise, the service area of the city shall be the area described in subsection (a) of this section plus the additional areas actually served, and only such areas actually served, on the date that any such contract is abrogated, breached, or otherwise becomes unenforceable. 
(e)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, this section shall not be construed to affect any intergovernmental contract between the city and any affected political subdivision. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1088), page 3345, § 4(57A); 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 482), page 5418, § 1) 
Sec. 57B. - Zoning, subdivision and building regulations. 
The governing authority of the City of Cumming is hereby authorized to adopt and enforce reasonable zoning regulations, subdivision regulations and building code regulations for one mile beyond the corporate limits of the city. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1088), page 3345, § 5(57B)) 
Sec. 58. - Repealer. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all laws and parts of laws in conflict with the provisions of this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location in the Charter of amendments made by the General Assembly. The Charter is derived from 1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 437), page 1001. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location in the Charter of ordinance amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Cumming, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Ordinance codification, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
City administrator. The term "city administrator" means the city administrator of the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Cumming, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
County. Whenever the term "county," "the county," or "this county" is used, it refers to Forsyth County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs, and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" means the governing body of the city, referred in the Charter as the city council. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year, unless otherwise provided. 
Municipal court. The term "municipal court" means the municipal court of the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the term "of the City of Cumming" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical terms. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all terms, except terms of art, or terms connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in the trade or with reference to the subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after, unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Seating, minimum. Where this Code requires seating for a minimum number of persons, only chairs, stools, and booths shall be provided as the required seating. The capacity of seats without dividing arms shall be determined by allotting 18 inches per occupant. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the term "state," "the state," or "this state" is used, it refers to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance that, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(16)  Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section (subdivision, division, article, or chapter) ____________ of The Code of Cumming, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: … ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section (subdivision, division, article or chapter) not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Cumming, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (subdivision, division, article, or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (subdivision, division, article, or chapter) reads as follows: …." The new section (subdivision, division, article, or chapter) shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article, or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Liability for violations by corporations; other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each violation is a separate offense. 
(4)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(5)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); confinement of violators of municipal ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; authorization of municipal courts to impose any punishment up to the maximum specified by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers of municipalities with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1. 

Sec. 2-19. - Meetings. 
The mayor and council will hold its regular public meeting on the third Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. in the council chambers at City Hall, 100 Main Street, Cumming, Georgia. 
(Code 1998, § 2-31; Ord. of 12-6-1977; Ord. of 5-15-2012) 
Sec. 2-20. - Agenda; rules of procedure. 
(a)  There shall be a written agenda prepared by the mayor prior to each meeting of the mayor and council. All regular city council meetings shall follow an established order of business as follows: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Executive session (if needed); 
(3)  Consideration of minutes; 
(4)  Proclamations, recognitions, acknowledgements, presentations; 
(5)  Old business; 
(6)  New business; 
(7)  Announcements; 
(8)  Adjournment. 
The City Council of Cumming may amend, add to and/or delete from an agenda or this established order of business for its meetings in conformance with Georgia law. Persons who desire to have an item included on the agenda for a meeting are required to notify the city clerk in writing no later than noon of the day prior to the meeting of the mayor and council for the item to be considered by the mayor for inclusion on the agenda. The subject matter of the item shall be specified in the request. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the notice requirement for inclusion on the agenda as specified in subsection (a) of this section, any person attending a meeting of the mayor and council may be recognized to address the mayor and council by the presiding officer. 
(c)  The proceedings of the mayor and council shall be generally governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, so far as applicable and not inconsistent with the special rules of the mayor and council, the Charter and this Code. 
(d)  In the event that a public hearing is part of the agenda of the mayor and council, or in the event that a member of the public is invited to address the mayor and council on any topic, the public comment or address shall be limited to no more than two minutes for any individual and ten minutes total, unless otherwise specifically provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 2-32; Ord. of 5-15-2012, § 2; Ord. of 7-17-2012 , § 1; Ord. of 7-20-2012, § 1) 
Secs. 2-21—2-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The city compiles and publishes separately its manual of personnel policies and procedures, safety policy, retirement and deferred compensation plans for city employees, and regulations and requirements for bail bonding. Official copies of such documents are on file in the city clerk's office. 
State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-44. - Volunteer firefighters. 
The city's volunteer firefighters are to be included within the definition of the term "employee" under O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1(2) for the purposes of worker's compensation coverage. 
(Code 1998, § 2-66; Res. of 5-17-1983) 
Secs. 2-45—2-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-81. - Declaration of need. 
There is determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.) to function in the city for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the city, thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry. 
(Code 1998, § 2-121; Ord. of 7-11-1972) 
Sec. 2-82. - Activated. 
There is activated in the city a public body corporate and politic known as the "Development Authority of Cumming" and referred to in this division as the development authority which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1998, § 2-122; Ord. of 7-11-1972) 
Sec. 2-83. - Election; terms. 
There shall be seven members elected to the board of directors of the development authority, none of whom may be an officer or employee of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 2-123; Ord. of 7-11-1972; Ord. of 9-30-1980; Ord. of 10-21-1980) 
Secs. 2-84—2-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECREATION COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5. 

Sec. 2-110. - Established. 
There is established the City of Cumming Recreation Commission, referred to in this division as the recreation commission. This commission shall consist of five persons serving without pay. Vacancies in such commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by another appointment for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1998, § 2-146; Ord. of 4-7-1970) 
Sec. 2-111. - Officers; bylaws. 
(a)  Immediately after their appointment, the members of the recreation commission shall meet and organize by electing one of their members president and such other officers as may be necessary. 
(b)  The commission shall have power to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of recreation for the city. 
(Code 1998, § 2-146; Ord. of 4-7-1970) 
Sec. 2-112. - Powers; duties. 
The recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the city. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners. 
(Code 1998, § 2-148; Ord. of 4-7-1970) 
Sec. 2-113. - Superintendent, other personnel appointed. 
The recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as superintendent who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the commission deems proper. 
(Code 1998, § 2-149; Ord. of 4-7-1970) 
Sec. 2-114. - Finances. 
Annually the recreation commission shall submit a budget to the mayor and council for its approval. The commission may receive fees and revenues from the operation of recreation facilities and programs and may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Code 1998, § 2-150; Ord. of 4-7-1970) 
Sec. 2-115. - Reports. 
The recreation commission shall make an annual report to the mayor and council and such other reports as from time to time may be requested. 
(Code 1998, § 2-151; Ord. of 4-7-1970) 
Secs. 2-116—2-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-144. - Established, membership and powers. 
The establishment, membership and powers of the planning commission shall be as provided in chapter 101, article II. 
Secs. 2-145—2-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. §§ 45-6-6, 50-18-70 et seq.; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq.; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e). 

Sec. 2-172. - Plan adopted. 
(a)  The city clerk is designated as the coordinator of the records management plan and authorized to act for and on behalf of the city in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. Records retention schedules approved by the city shall be documented in the record of the deliberations of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Records shall be maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules. No record shall be destroyed except as authorized by a state records committee approved retention schedule. 
(Code 1998, § 2-186; Ord. of 10-20-1992) 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-173. - Code enforcement officer. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of code and ordinance enforcement officer ("code enforcement officer") for the city. The code enforcement officer shall be appointed by the mayor and city council, and shall continue to serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council until a successor is named. The code enforcement officer shall have the ability to issue citations for the alleged violation of the following codes and ordinances of the city: Buildings and building regulations (chapter 103), soil erosion and sedimentation control (chapter 107), subdivision and land development regulations and construction specifications (chapter 109), and zoning (chapter 113). 
(b)  The initial code enforcement officer shall be John Coffman, who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council pursuant to subsection 2-173(a). 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-174. - Code enforcement tribunal. 
The code enforcement officer shall return any issued citations to the city's municipal court. The city's municipal court shall conduct proceedings on these and other City Code and ordinance violations pursuant to the rules of the municipal court. 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-175. - Duties, responsibilities and powers of code enforcement officer. 
(a)  The duties and responsibilities of the code enforcement officer shall be to enforce the codes and ordinances designated herein enacted by the mayor and city council, to issue citations for violations of any such codes or ordinances, and to prosecute such violations with or without a prosecuting attorney. In all instances where such officer desires the assistance of a prosecuting attorney, the city solicitor shall serve in that capacity. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the code enforcement officer shall have no arrest powers. If arrest becomes necessary, such officer shall immediately turn the matter over to the city's police department. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer has the authority to exercise his or her discretion and issue written warnings for violations of the codes and ordinances described herein as deemed appropriate by the code enforcement officer. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall limit the ability of the city's police department to issue citations for violations of any codes or ordinances and to prosecute such violations in the city's municipal court. 
(d)  Each citation issued by the code enforcement officer shall state the day, time, and place at which the accused is to appear before the municipal court, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the code enforcement officer or an officer of the city's police department. The prosecution for violations of city codes and ordinances upon the citation issued by the code enforcement officer or police officer shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of a citation by either the city code and enforcement officer or the police officer issuing the citation. The original, a duplicate original, or a carbon copy of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, and a copy shall promptly be filed with the municipal court. 
(e)  Should a defendant fail to appear before the city's municipal court at the scheduled time for trial or arraignment, the municipal court shall be authorized to issue a bench warrant for failure to appear and to require a bond to secure any future appearance. 
(f)  Execution may issue immediately upon any fine imposed by the municipal court which is not immediately paid. The city's police department (and/or the Forsyth County Jail through any intergovernmental agreements applying to the housing of inmates for the city) shall receive and house all persons sentenced to confinement for contempt or arrested or sentenced to confinement for violation of city codes or ordinances. 
(g)  Review of convictions shall be de novo to the county's superior court. 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-176. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have the power to punish convictions on citations issued by the code enforcement officer in accordance with the city's Code of Ordinances section 1-11. Nothing in this article shall require the maximum penalty to be assessed, as the Municipal Court may tailor any punishment for violation to the facts and circumstances of each individual case. 
(b)  Any fine imposed may be collected as a judgment pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-10-20, including the issuance of a writ of fieri facias. 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-177. - Supplemental provisions. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes by any other lawful means including other criminal and civil proceedings. 
(b)  The city shall not perform investigations or inspections of residential rental property unless there is probable cause to believe there is or has been a violation or violations of applicable codes, and in no event shall the city require the registration of residential rental property. Conditions which appear to be code violations which are in plain view may form the basis for probable cause. 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-178. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective upon its adoption by the governing authority of the city. 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-179. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-180. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts thereof in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018 ) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted March 19, 2013 , repealed the former ch. 4, §§ 4-1—4-6, 4-31—4-37, 4-83—4-86, 4-116—4-120, 4-139—4-149, 4-167—4-170, and §§ 1—3, 6—45, art. VIII, §§ 46—54, and art. IX enacted a new ch. 4 as set out herein. Provisions have been renumbered and styled for the purpose of maintaining Code format. Omitted from codification were § 4, pertaining to severability, and art. X, pertaining to effective date. The former ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1998, §§ 6-1—6-5, 6-41—6-47, 6-101, 6-104—6-106, 6-131, 6-133—6-136, 6-171—6-180, 6-201—6-205; §§ 1.1—1.12, 2.1, 2.4—2.6, 3.1, 3.3—3.6, 4.1—4.10, 5.1—5.5 of an ordinance adopted Apr. 21, 1992; §§ 1—3 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 21, 2003; § I(1)—(4) of an ordinance adopted Aug. 17, 2004; §§ 2—10 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 15, 2005; and §§ 1—4 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 20, 2011. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Cumming Alcohol Ordinance." 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 1(C)) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, except if the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcohol treatment facility shall include any alcohol treatment facility operated or licensed by the state or the county government. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or concoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other grain product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as "non-alcoholic" beer, which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or other products, and containing less than three percent, but more than 0.1 percent alcohol by volume. 
Brew pub means an eating establishment holding a brew pub license under this chapter in which malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form, and which represents a limited exception from the three tier distribution system of alcoholic beverages in the State of Georgia so long as all laws and regulations, state and local, regarding the operation of the brew pub are followed. 
Church building , as used in this chapter, means the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. 
Director means the Planning and Zoning Director of the City of Cumming or his designee. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Distiller means a licensee who engages in the process of distilling alcoholic beverages. 
Distilling means the process of purifying a liquid by evaporation and condensation as used in the production of alcoholic beverages. 
Eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full service kitchen. An eating establishment shall be prepared to serve food every hour the establishment is open and shall derive at least 50 percent of the gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Employee permit means an authorization granted by the city to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as a retail consumption dealer. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Full service kitchen means a kitchen that consists of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. 
Governing authority means the Mayor and Members of the city Council of the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Growler means a glass jug or container with a capacity of 32 to 64 fluid ounces containing a screw-on or hinged cap used for purchasing and transporting malt beverages. 
Hotel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, either transient, permanent or residential. Such businesses shall have one or more public dining rooms with an adequate kitchen. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment described in this chapter, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel pursuant to this definition. 
Indoor commercial recreational establishment means and is limited to an establishment that: regularly serves prepared food with a full service kitchen and is prepared to serve food every hour the establishment is open and deriving at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and recreation activities; and the sale of food and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. The primary activity on the premises of the indoor commercial recreational establishment shall be family-oriented in nature, generally meaning a use that attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but are not limited to, dinner theaters, bowling centers, and other similar uses. Outdoor commercial recreation facilities, bingo parlors, dance halls, nightclubs, taverns, billiard parlors, video arcades, adult entertainment and/or sexually related entertainment activities, and similar uses are specifically excluded from this definition of indoor commercial recreational establishments. 
Licensed premises means any premises which is required by law to be licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license for the sale or distribution of distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine under this chapter is issued. In the case of a partnership, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership are licensees. 
Manufacturer means a licensee who engages in the process of manufacturing alcoholic beverages. 
Mayor and council means the Mayor and Members of City Council of City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Reside means the act or fact of living or regularly staying at or in some place for the discharge of a duty or the enjoyment of a benefit, or the place where one actually lives as distinguished from a place of temporary sojourn. 
Resident agent shall mean a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of Forsyth County, Georgia. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale or consumption on the premises. 
Retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package liquor store means an establishment which holds a license for the retail sale of wine, malt beverages and distilled spirits for sale in unbroken packages at retail only not for consumption on the premises and not for resale. 
School building as referred to in this chapter shall apply only to state, county or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the schools and colleges of this state. The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. 
Wholesaler means any person who sells malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits to other wholesalers, retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage, excluding beer or malt beverages, containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, grapes or other agricultural products either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, sake or rice wines, special natural wines, rectified wines, ciders, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 2; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 1) 
Sec. 4-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
Any person and/or business who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each offense and/or not more than 30 days in jail, unless a different penalty is set out in this chapter. Any such penalty, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 3) 
Secs. 4-4—4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local licensing of sale of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

Sec. 4-31. - License is a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city under a license granted by the governing authority upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and state law. 
(c)  All licenses granted pursuant to this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled and is subject to the terms of the Cumming Alcohol Ordinance, as the same may be amended from time to time." 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued in accord with this article is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 6) 
Sec. 4-32. - Licenses, generally. 
All licenses issued under this article shall: 
(1)  Permit the licensees to sell or distribute the beverage or beverages for which the license is issued inside the corporate limits of the City of Cumming, Georgia pursuant to the terms of this article and consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States; 
(2)  Not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another without prior approval from the mayor and council upon written application from the licensee; and 
(3)  Permit the licensee to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, wines, or any combination thereof, depending upon the license issued, for consumption on the premises where sold or for retail package sales. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 7) 
Sec. 4-33. - Licenses, permits and fees. 
(a)  License, permit and administrative fees applicable to this article are set out in section 12-4 of this Code. 
(b)  Each applicant for a license other than an employee permit shall pay an administrative and investigatory fee. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one administrative and investigatory fee. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 8) 
Sec. 4-34. - Fee payment. 
(a)  Before a license or permit shall be granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and each applicant shall pay the license, permit or administrative and investigatory fees in accordance with section 4-33. 
(b)  Each application for a license shall be accompanied by the full amount of the license fee, together with the administrative and investigative fee. All fees are payable only with certified check or funds. 
(c)  Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no administrative and investigatory fee. 
(d)  If the application is denied, the funds submitted, less the administrative and investigatory fee, will be refunded. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the administrative and investigatory fee shall be retained. Once a license has issued, however, no portion of the application fees shall be refunded if the license is revoked, suspended, transferred or surrendered. 
(e)  Any license application made pursuant to this article may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, the funds submitted, less the administrative and investigatory fee, will be refunded. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 9) 
Sec. 4-35. - Application forms. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell, manufacture, or distill alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form provided by the Director of Planning and Zoning of the City of Cumming (director). 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residential address of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the names and address of the resident agent (which may be the same as the applicant if the applicant qualifies as a resident agent); the name of the manager(s); and the name of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity that owns or operates the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the director the name and address of the new manager and other information requested by the director within ten days of such change. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility, consent to criminal background search, and other records as required by the application form to insure compliance with the provisions of this article. The failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  When instructed to do so by the director, the investigatory fee, fingerprints and consent to criminal background search shall be provided directly to the city police department to search for any instance of criminal activity during the ten years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(e)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(f)  Reapplication. In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this article, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. The mayor and council or its designee shall provide written notice to any applicant if the city intends to deny the application under the provisions of this article. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to an appeal hearing under the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 10; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 3) 
Sec. 4-36. - Posting and advertising in official legal organ for new licenses. 
A notice of each application for a license under this article shall be advertised in the official legal organ of the city once during the two-week period immediately preceding consideration of the application by the mayor and council. The director shall collect the cost of this advertisement as part of any administrative fee charged as part of the application process. Before the meeting where the application for a license is to be heard, the applicant shall, at his expense, post on the premises where the activities permitted by such license are to be conducted, a notice of the pending application meeting the following minimum specifications: This notice shall be painted or printed in black letters two inches or more in height, against a white background, which sign shall measure at least 12 square feet. The sign and shall be placed with the base of the sign not more than three feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises, facing the most frequently traveled road, street or highway abutting same, and not more than 15 feet therefrom. The sign shall state clearly the nature and purpose of the application and the name of the person making the application. The sign shall be posted as described herein for the seven days immediately preceding the meeting where the application is scheduled for consideration by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 11) 
Sec. 4-37. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
Separate applications must be made for each location where a licensee will sell, manufacture or distill alcoholic beverages, unless such "separate location" is the subject of a special event license under the terms of this chapter which shall be handled pursuant to section 4-186. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 12; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 4) 
Sec. 4-38. - Qualifications of licensee. 
(a)  No license for the sale, manufacture or distillation of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. The applicant must not be less than 21 years of age; and must be a resident of Forsyth County for not less than six consecutive months before filing the application, unless the applicant specifically designates a resident agent of Forsyth County who has resided within the county for at least six months before filing the application, which resident shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
(b)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless proper information establishes to the satisfaction of the mayor and council or its designee that such person, partners in the firm, officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted [of] or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, and have been released from parole or probation, any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexually related crime within a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant, nor any of the named (in the application) owners of the establishment, has been so convicted in the five years preceding the filing of the application. If any applicant, partner, or officer used in the sale, dispensing, manufacture or distillation of any alcoholic beverage, after a license has been granted, is convicted or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime, then the license shall be immediately revoked and canceled. 
(c)  No license for the sale, manufacture or distillation of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law which amounts to a felony, within five years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(d)  For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (1968 Ga. Laws, page 324), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored if the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this article to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license pertaining to alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(f)  No license for the sale, manufacture or distillation of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any alcohol license of the city previously revoked within five years prior to the filing of the application. 
(g)  The mayor and council may decline to issue a license when a person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(h)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a resident agent as indicated in subsection (a). The licensee shall file the name of such resident agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the director and shall be in such form as the director may prescribe. The resident agent can be, but does not have to be, the applicant and/or the licensee. 
(i)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license if the applicant lacks adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or if the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. Each person signing an application for a license under this article must file concurrently with the application a sworn affirmation as to his interest and/or involvement with the entity seeking the license. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 13; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 5) 
Sec. 4-39. - Specification of premises. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and a floor plan of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the state prior to the issuance of any license. The proposed building shall be subject to final inspection and approval by the director or his designee. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passage ways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(b)  In deciding whether or not an application will be granted or denied, the local government may consider not only the qualifications of the applicant, the location of the business and its proximity to other enterprises, but also shall be authorized to consider and shall consider the following: 
(1)  The effect that the establishment would have on the area surrounding the establishment in terms of traffic congestion and the general character of the area; 
(2)  The effect the establishment would have on the value of properties surrounding the site; and 
(3)  The number and proximity of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted in the surrounding area, and whether granting the application would be contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 14) 
Sec. 4-40. - Location of licensed operation—Distance requirements from schools and church buildings. 
(a)  Licenses shall be issued only for locations in areas with one of the following zoning designations: 
(1)  Neighborhood Shopping District (NS). 
(2)  Highway Business District (HB). 
(3)  Central Business District (CBD). 
(4)  Planned Shopping Center District (PSC). 
(5)  Office-Commercial Multi-Story District (OCMS). 
(6)  Restricted Industrial District (M1). 
(7)  Institutional District (INST) subject to the grant of a conditional use permit which shall only be issued after consideration of the following factors: 
a.  Proximity and access of the proposed use to a church building; 
b.  Proximity and access of the proposed use to a school, day care center, and recreation facility; 
c.  Proximity and access of the proposed use to a residential development; and 
d.  All of the factors delineated in section 4-39(b). 
(8)  Multiple Use District (MU) subject to the grant of a conditional use permit which shall only be issued after consideration of the following factors: 
(a)  Proximity and access of the proposed use to a church building; 
(b)  Proximity and access of the proposed use to a school, day care center, and recreation facility; 
(c)  Proximity and access of the proposed use to a residential development; and 
(d)  All of the factors delineated in section 4-39(b). 
(b)  No person may manufacture, sell or offer to sell wine or malt beverages in or within 100 yards of a church or any school building, daycare facility or alcohol treatment facility. 
(c)  No person may manufacture, distill, sell or offer to sell distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of a church or alcohol treatment facility, or within 200 yards of any school building or daycare facility. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in a straight line from the front door of the structure from which the alcoholic beverages are manufactured, distilled, sold or offered for sale, in a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway, along such public sidewalk, walkway street, road or highway by the nearest route to the front door of the school building, educational building, college campus building, church building, or alcohol treatment facility. 
(e)  As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school or daycare or alcohol treatment facility within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property so long as there is not a period of 12 months or more during which there is no manufacture, distillation, or sale of alcoholic beverages occurring on the premises. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 15; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 6) 
Sec. 4-41. - Locations where permitted—Retail package liquor stores. 
(a)  Retail licenses for the combined sale of beer, wine and distilled spirits shall be issued to or renewed by persons operating retail package liquor stores. No distilled spirits by the package shall be sold at retail except in retail package liquor stores. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the retail sale within these establishments of liquid commodities, mixes and accessories normally used in the preparation and serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No retail package liquor stores shall be located within 500 yards of any other retail package liquor store, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(c)  All retail package liquor stores shall have ingress and egress provided directly to and only to the exterior of the building in which the facility is located and not to any other enclosed part of the building in which the facility is located. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 16) 
Sec. 4-42. - License issuance. 
(a)  If the applicant is an individual and the license is granted, then the license shall be issued in the individual's name. 
(b)  If the applicant is a partnership and the license is granted, then the license shall be issued in the name of a partner who is a resident of City of Cumming, or in the event a registered agent was designated pursuant to section 4-38 for matters relating to the license, the name of the partnership with the identity of the registered agent noted thereon. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation or a nonprofit and the license is granted, then the license shall be issued in the name of the shareholder or member who is a resident of the City of Cumming, or in the event a registered agent was designated pursuant to section 4-38 for matters relating to the license, the name of the corporation or non-profit with the identity of the registered agent noted thereon. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 17; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 7) 
Sec. 4-43. - Transferability of license/change in ownership. 
(a)  Individuals. In the event of a change of ownership of a business for which an individual has been issued a license, the new owner, if desiring a license, must complete a transfer application, meet the qualifications of this article, and tender with the application the all administrative and investigatory fees as provided in this article, as well as any license transfer fee that may be due. 
(b)  Partnerships or corporations. In the event of a change of any ownership interest in a business that is owned or operated by a partnership or corporation and for which a license has been issued, the licensee shall report such change to the director in writing within ten days. "Change of ownership interest" as used herein includes, but is not limited to, any change in: 
(1)  Division of profits and/or losses; 
(2)  Division of net gross or sales; 
(3)  Members of a partnership or LLC; 
(4)  Stockholders of corporate stock owning more than 20 percent; and 
(5)  Senior management. 
The director will determine based upon the nature of the change in ownership interest whether a transfer application is required, and shall so inform the licensee in writing. If, as a result of any change of ownership interest, the licensee would not qualify under other provisions of this article for the issuance of a license, then the license issued to the licensee shall be subject to revocation and shall not be subject to renewal. 
(c)  Resident agents. In the event of a change in the resident agent designated by an applicant under this article, the licensee must submit the name of a new resident agent, must complete a transfer application, meet the qualifications of this article, and tender with the application the all administrative and investigatory fees as provided in this article, as well as any license transfer fee that may be due. 
(d)  Transfers generally. After receipt of a transfer application, the director shall process the transfer application in the same manner as a new application is processed, and shall notify the applicant within 30 days of any objection to the transfer, and shall thereafter schedule the transfer request to come before the mayor and council for a decision. The license shall remain in effect pending approval or disapproval of the transfer. If the transfer is approved, the license shall be transferred for the remainder of the license term. If the transfer is not approved, then the transfer fee will be refunded, but the administrative and investigatory fee will not be refunded. 
(e)  [ Forms. ] Transfer applications will be on such forms as are provided by the director for that purpose. 
(f)  [ Death of licensee. ] Upon the death of a licensee, the executor or administrator of the licensee's estate may continue to operate under the license for the balance of the calendar year without payment of any additional fee or may delegate the operation of the business to another person if the person operating under the license, whether the executor, administrator, or delegate, would otherwise be qualified as a licensee under the provisions of this article. 
(g)  [ Transfer of business location. ] In the event a licensee under this article desires to transfer the location of the licensee's business to a different location for which there is not already a license issued, the licensee shall pay an administrative fee and complete a transfer application on forms to be provided by the director. The transfer application shall be subject to notification requirements in section 4-36 and the matter shall thereafter be scheduled to come before the mayor and council. No investigatory fee will be required for this type of transfer. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 18; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 8) 
Sec. 4-44. - Display of license and ordinance at place of business. 
(a)  The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of the business of the licensee. 
(b)  Each licensee licensed under this article shall keep a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived upon the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this article; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this article. The licensee shall in all respects be the responsible party for violations of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 19; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 9) 
Sec. 4-45. - Expiration; renewal of license. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew the license shall file renewal applications, with the requisite license fee enumerated in section 12-4, with the director on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before October 15 of each year. Any renewal applications received after October 15 shall pay, in addition to the annual fee, a late charge of 15 percent of the license(s) amount. If license application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(b)  Any licensee must annually meet the requirements set forth by the mayor and council in order to obtain a renewal of any license. Any licensee making proper application with supporting documents for a renewal license to operate during the following calendar year, and, having filed such application before October 15, shall be permitted to continue to operate pending final approval of the licensees application for the following year if final approval is not granted before January 1. 
(c)  All licenses granted under this article shall be for the calendar year, and the full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a license fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year, except for applications for a temporary special event license which shall not be halved. 
(d)  Any person renewing any license issued under this article who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to the annual fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate of 12 percent (one percent per month or 12 percent APR). 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 20) 
Sec. 4-46. - Automatic license forfeiture for non-use. 
A license issued pursuant to this article shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actually engaged in the business of manufacturing, distilling, or sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with the specific terms or conditions for which the granting of the license was approved. Any holder of any license under this article who shall for a period of 30 days after the license has been issued cease to operate the business for which it was issued shall, after the 30-day period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action, and shall not be entitled to a refund of any monies paid or deposited under this article. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 21; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 10) 
Sec. 4-47. - Suspension of license. 
(a)  The following shall be grounds for the suspension of a license issued under this article for such period of time as the mayor and council shall, in its sole discretion, determine appropriate: 
(1)  A violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, or any provision of this article or the regulations promulgated under its authority; 
(2)  The failure of the licensee and employees or agents of the licensee to promptly report to the city police department any violation of law/breach of peace, disturbance or altercation occurring on or at the licensee's premises; 
(3)  The violation of any law, regulation or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages and wines, by any employee or agent of the licensee in connection with the operation of the business of the licensee; 
(4)  Operation of the business of the licensee in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, or in a manner contrary to public welfare, health or morals; 
(5)  Failure to furnish the director, on request, any information or records that would be necessary or needed for use in determining the licensee's compliance and qualifications under this article; or 
(6)  Selling alcoholic beverages to a minor or any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(b)  Wherever this article permits the mayor and council to suspend any license issued under this article but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised under the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license; however, said suspension and the basis therefore may be considered in any request for a renewal of said license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this article and those set by the mayor and council. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances, remedial, or corrective steps taken by licensee. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 22) 
Sec. 4-48. - Revocation or nonrenewal of license. 
(a)  The mayor and council may revoke any license issued under this article, or refuse to issue the same, if the licensee or applicant for renewal: 
(1)  Is convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Makes any false statement of a material fact on the application for license or renewal thereof, or on any document required to be filed with the director; 
(3)  Fails to timely give written notice of any change of ownership interest as required in this article; 
(4)  Violates any rules or regulations promulgated by the mayor and council under this article, of which the licensee has reasonable notice; or 
(5)  Becomes disqualified under this article to hold a license. 
(b)  The mayor and council may revoke the license for any reason specified by section 4-47 (suspension) of this article. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended two or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(d)  The mayor and council shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(e)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee under this article no longer maintains adequate responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city, the mayor and council may revoke the license. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 23) 
Sec. 4-49. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing, other than in an emergency situation as set forth in subsection (c) below. 
(b)  The mayor and council or its designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of its intent to deny, suspend or revoke a license. Such written notification shall be hand delivered or sent certified mail to the applicant at the address shown on the application, and the applicant shall be directed to show cause, if any there be, why the proposed action should not be taken by the mayor and council. The notice shall: 
(1)  Advise of the time and place specified for the hearing, which hearing shall be held in not less than ten days, but not more than 30 days from the date of the service of the notice; 
(2)  Set forth in reasonable detail the grounds for such action and the factual basis supporting those grounds; 
(3)  Advise the applicant or licensee of the right to present evidence, witnesses or arguments and to be represented by counsel at the hearing; and 
(4)  Be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(c)  In the event that an emergency situation is presented where there is a danger to human life, imminent criminal activity or other imminent danger to the peace, prosperity and welfare of the citizens of Cumming, the director may immediately suspend or revoke a license so long as a hearing thereon as specified in subsection (b) above is held within 15 days of the emergency situation or revocation. 
(d)  The decision of the mayor and council in the hearing provided for in this section shall be the final decision of the city. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 24) 
Sec. 4-50. - Audits of licensees. 
(a)  If the mayor and council, the director, or its designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, it shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license(s) issued under this article. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements. 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer, wine and distilled spirits licensees). 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets. 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports. 
(5)  Federal income tax return with all Form 1099s. 
The mayor and council may waive all or some of the requirements of the foregoing sentence if it finds that no such records exist and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensed establishment to require them to keep such records. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 25) 
Sec. 4-51. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
Sworn officers of the city police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverages ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city employee to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this article, and is furthermore not intended to limit the ability of the city police department and its officers to conduct searches in conformity with other laws. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 26) 
Sec. 4-52. - Establishment can be temporarily closed by chief of police in cases of emergency. 
The chief of police or his designee may immediately close an establishment licensed under this article in case of emergency for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 27) 
Secs. 4-53—4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEE PERMITS 

Sec. 4-81. - Regulations as to employees and manager of licensed establishments. 
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages or serve in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been approved by the chief of police or his designee indicating that the person is eligible for such employment and has been issued an employee permit. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy(s), cook(s), host(s) or dishwasher(s). 
(3)  No employee permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department, the employee permit fee paid, a current and valid state driver's license has been presented, a Social Security number has been provided, and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the person, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. 
(4)  The chief of police or his designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any criminal record of the employee permit applicant. If the applicant complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter, the chief of police or his designee shall issue an employee permit to the person stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the person, in writing, that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal. 
(5)  No person shall be granted an employee permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the chief of police or his designee that such person has not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the felony or repeated misdemeanor illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy or any sexually related crime within a period of five years of the date of conviction and has been released from parole or probation. A person's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an employee permit. No person shall be granted an employee permit who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state or local law for any felony within five years of the date of conviction and has not been released from parole or probation prior to the filing for application for such permit. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (1968 Ga. Laws, page 324), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored if the person violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the person had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(6)  An employee permit shall be issued for a period of one calendar year from the date of the original application. Applications to renew an employee permit shall be filed and all required fees paid no later than 15 days prior to the date that the employee permit expires. The employee permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is working at the licensed establishment, or otherwise available for immediate inspection by members of the police department or a designee of the city. 
(7)  No person shall be issued an employee permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed or covered up any material fact by any device, trick or scheme while making application to the police department for an employee permit under this section. If it is determined that a person is in violation of this subsection and a permit is denied for this reason, then 30 calendar days must elapse from the date of notification before a new application and fee may be resubmitted. 
(8)  All employee permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the chief of police or his designee or the director or its designee. 
(9)  Replacement employee permits will be issued within 30 days of original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for an employee permit. 
(10)  All employee permits issued under this chapter remain the property of police department and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the chief of police or his designee, the director or his designee. 
(11)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold an employee permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a valid employee permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the city may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. Licensees are required by this chapter to inspect and verify that each employee required to do so has in their possession a valid employee permit. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 28; Ord. of 7-3-2018, § 1 ) 
Secs. 4-82—4-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 4-106. - Per drink excise tax. 
(a)  Every purchaser of an alcoholic beverage by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee licensed under this chapter, and such licensee shall remit the same to the city on or before the 20th day of the succeeding month on such forms as shall be prescribed by the city, which shall include a summary of the licensee's gross sales of alcoholic beverages sold by the drink. Gross sales shall include all credit sales, credit card sales, cash equivalent sales, and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the city clerk to the same extent as required of cash sales. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from state tax under part V of the Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now written or hereafter amended provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. It shall be the duty of every such licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied pursuant to this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable pursuant to this article, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years. 
(b)  Excise taxes received by the city after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a 20 percent penalty. 
(c)  If the mayor and council deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the city will notify the licensee in writing of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(d)  If any licensee fails to make a return, the director or his designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the license, or as the case may be, the amount of the total sales of the defaulting licensee subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information available to the director. Written notice shall be provided to the licensee. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned until the date of payment. 
(e)  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state or of the United States to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the director, he will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing, stating the specific ground upon which his claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city administrator, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the licensee, or may be refunded to the licensee if the licensee is no longer operating a licensed premises in the city. 
(f)  The director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax imposed by this section. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the director may require. The director or any person authorized in writing by the director may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. In the administration of the provision of this section, the director may require the filing of the reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to purchases which are subject to the tax. The report shall be filed with the director and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date of purchase, and such other information as the director may require. 
(g)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director or his designee, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 29) 
Sec. 4-107. - Excise tax on wholesalers. 
No retail licensee shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. All wholesale dealers engaged in the wholesale distributions of alcoholic beverages to retail package outlets in this city shall pay to the city administrator an excise tax of $0.22 per liter of wine for each liter of wine sold to retail package licensees and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Further, all wholesale dealers will pay to the city an excise tax for malted beverages sold to retail package outlets in this city equal to $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. Further, the wholesale dealers will pay to the city an excise tax on tap or draught beer in the sum of $6.00 for each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a like rate for fractional parts where the draught beer is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container. Further, all wholesale dealers will pay to the city an excise tax of $0.22 per liter for all distilled spirits, except for fortified wine, sold to a licensee authorized to sell distilled spirits by the package and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Payment of this excise tax shall be made before the tenth day of each month for all sales made during the previous month. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 30) 
Secs. 4-108—4-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE 

Sec. 4-131. - On-premises consumption. 
On-premises consumption sales: Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. on Monday through Thursday, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday, and December 31 (New Year's Eve), if December 31 falls on a Monday through Saturday. Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises on election days provided the outlet for such sale is not located within 250 feet of a polling place. Alcoholic beverages may be sold on Sunday for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and midnight. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 31) 
Sec. 4-132. - Retail package. 
(a)  Retail package outlets shall engage in the sale of beer and/or wine only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. The sale of beer and wine is allowed on election days provided the outlet is not located within 250 feet of a polling place. 
(b)  The sale of distilled spirits by the package shall occur only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Sunday. The sale of distilled spirits by the package is allowed on election days provided the outlet is not located within 250 feet of a polling place. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 32) 
Secs. 4-133—4-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 4-156. - Consumption sales only. 
Persons holding a license to sell malt beverages, wine, and/or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage by the package or bottle except when selling barrels of malt beverages to wholesalers within the requirements of a brew pub license or to the extent allowed pursuant to 4-219 providing for the re-corkage of wine. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 33) 
Sec. 4-157. - Locations where permitted (alcoholic beverages by the drink). 
No alcoholic beverage may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except in sites appropriately zoned and that: 
(1)  Are eating establishments; 
(2)  Are indoor commercial recreation establishments; 
(3)  Are an indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center capable of serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen; prepared to serve food every hour it is open and deriving at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities. When eating establishments are located in hotels, motels, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure; or 
(4)  Are publicly or privately owned and are the site of an authorized catered event properly permitted in accordance with the ordinance. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 34) 
Sec. 4-158. - Poured alcohol to be transported by employees with employee permits. 
Poured alcoholic beverages shall be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by employees with a valid employee permit. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 35) 
Sec. 4-159. - Employment of underage persons prohibited—Exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed under this chapter without written consent from parent(s) or guardian(s). 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 36) 
Sec. 4-160. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcohol beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on-premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)  The height of such enclosing structure shall be a minimum of 3½ feet above the patio floor, but the structure does not have to be solid or restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection department and other departments as required by governing regulations or codes. 
(d)  The only exit from this area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. 
(e)  If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved by the mayor and council or its designee. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's development and fire codes. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. "Patio areas," as that term is used in this subsection, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 37) 
Sec. 4-161. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on-premises. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep any beer, wine, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 38) 
Sec. 4-162. - Solicitation prohibited. 
No retail consumption dealers licensed under this chapter shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for herself/himself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the beverage; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting the establishment or to an agent or manager to solicit for herself/himself or for the others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage, or money with which to purchase the beverage. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 39) 
Sec. 4-163. - Promotions and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at a time; however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brew pub from offering a sampler of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces. Each sampler shall not exceed four different types of malt beverages; 
(3)  Except as set forth below, sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
a.  A licensee may offer one category of discounted price alcoholic beverages (i.e., selecting beer, wine, or distilled spirits) subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The discount may only be offered for a single business day (a "discount day") during which time the discount shall apply uniformly to the selected category of beverage at all times that the licensed establishment may legally sell alcoholic beverages that discount day; 
2.  The category of alcoholic beverages and the discount applied to such beverage shall be prominently displayed at the licensee's establishment such that enforcement personnel can identify what category of beverage is being discounted, the discount provided, and the specific discount day; 
3.  The licensee shall not be entitled to alternate between categories of reduced price alcoholic beverages during the same discount day; 
4.  The licensee shall be entitled to limit a discount to a particular brand of alcoholic beverage within a specific category of beverage; 
5.  Licensees shall be authorized to offer and advertise regularly occurring discount days so long as all other requirements of this subsection receive compliance; 
6.  This subsection shall not authorize any increase in the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(5)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week; or 
(6)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day except as expressly authorized by this chapter. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as happy hour or similarly designated promotions. 
(f)  The city police department shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(g)  No licensee may require the purchase of any alcoholic beverage as a part of or as a prerequisite to the purchase of any other product or service. If alcoholic beverages are included as part of a package of other goods and/or services, the alcoholic beverages must be priced separately and all customers must be allowed to purchase the remaining goods and services without the alcoholic beverages at a price from which the full price of the alcoholic beverages has been deducted. 
(h)  Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit an on-premises consumption licensee from conducting a wine or malt beverage tasting which conforms to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any tasting occurring on the premises of a business possessing a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be limited to an area that is separated from the remainder of the premises by walls and/or other partitions so as to restrict access to the tasting area only to those persons participating in the tasting activity. 
(2)  Purpose of tastings. A tasting permit is intended to allow a licensee to conduct wine and/or malt beverage tastings in conjunction with an educational or instructional activity and is not intended to be part of the core operations of the licensee. 
a.  Tastings are limited to no more than once weekly, per category of beverage eligible for tastings (malt beverage or wine only). 
b.  Tastings are limited to no more than two ounces per glass, with no more than eight ounces being served to an individual during a single day. 
c.  Tastings may be held for wine or malt beverages, but not for both wine and malt beverages at the same time. 
(3)  No more than 30 days and no less than seven days prior to the holding of any tasting event, the licensee shall notify the director, in writing, that a tasting event will occur to include the date, time and specific location of the tasting event. Failure to so notify the director of the tasting event will result in the tasting event being an illegal consumption on the premises activity in violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 40) 
Secs. 4-164—1-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL EVENTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES 

Sec. 4-186. - Special event. 
(a)  Sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may be authorized by the mayor and council at special events or festivals under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The special event or festival lasts 14 days or less; 
(2)  The sale of alcoholic beverages may only be made by an existing licensee; 
(3)  All employees at the point of sale must have an employee permit; 
(4)  All general requirements for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including but not limited to hours of sale, must be observed; and 
(5)  The licensee must apply for a special event permit on forms prescribed by the director and pay a special event fee in the amount established by the city. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit private a individual or club from serving alcohol at a private event for members and their guests, so long as said alcohol is not sold, either directly or indirectly. 
(c)  Special events approved by the mayor and council may permit the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption at locations which would not otherwise qualify for on-premises consumption sales. In any application for a special event permit, the applicant must designate whether the event is to be held at a location which is already permitted for on-premises consumption sales, and if not, how the applicant proposes to facilitate the goals of: 
(1)  Restricting alcohol sales and the consumption of alcohol to those persons legally able to consume alcohol; and 
(2)  Prevent persons legally consuming alcoholic beverages at the special event from leaving the location of the special event with their alcoholic beverage. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 41) 
Sec. 4-187. - Bona fide nonprofit civic organizations. 
Bona fide nonprofit civic organizations may sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises if the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Upon the filing of an application and payment of a fee equal to the special event permit fee, a bona fide nonprofit civic organization may obtain a permit authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed three days, subject to any law regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
(2)  No more than six permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year. All permits shall be approved in advance by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Permits are valid only for the location specified in the permit, which location must be specifically approved for consumption on the premises for the special event and must meet the general qualifications for an on-premises consumption license. 
(4)  Said applicant shall comply with all general provisions of this chapter and all regulations for consumption on the premises. 
(5)  Any permitted organization shall provide at its expense the necessary security services and emergency services available for the permitted event as approved in advance by the director. 
(6)  Any employee or volunteer of the nonprofit event permit holder working the event in any position dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders, or mixing alcoholic beverages must be at least 18 years of age and hold an employee permit as required by section 4-81. 
(7)  As a condition of issuance of a nonprofit event permit, the permit holder shall indemnify and hold the City of Cumming harmless from claims, demands, or causes of action that may arise from activities associated with the nonprofit event. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 42) 
Sec. 4-188. - Certain organizations exempt from food establishment requirements. 
Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other bona fide nonprofit civic organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the Georgia Income Tax Law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to the terms of this chapter regarding general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 43) 
Sec. 4-189. - Hotel in-room service. 
(a)  In-room service means the provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel-motel guestroom that contains beer and/or wine only and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of the beer and/or wine contained therein is final on each container at the time it is selected and opened by the guest. 
(b)  No hotel-motel shall be authorized to provide in-room service until it has been issued a hotel in-room service license. 
(c)  Any hotel-motel that acquires this in-room service shall also be required to obtain a consumption on the premises license for beer and/or wine and meet all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  The sale of beer and/or wine by in-room service shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations relative to the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages, except as provided otherwise in this article. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 44) 
Sec. 4-190. - Wine and malt beverage tastings. 
(a)  [ Retail licensees eligible. ] The general rules and regulations contained in this chapter regarding consumption on the premises of licensee for the retail package sale of alcoholic beverages notwithstanding, retail licensees shall be eligible to conduct "tastings" so long as they are in conformity with this section. 
(b)  Permit available. A tasting permit shall be available for those licensees holding a City of Cumming license for the sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the package as well as a valid state license for the sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the package. A tasting permit is required for any business operating a retail package location that desires to conduct wine and/or malt beverage tastings. 
(c)  Tasting locations. No tastings shall be conducted on the premises of any business licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package. Any tasting occurring on the premises of a business possessing a license to sell wine and/or malt beverages by the package shall be limited to an area that is separated from the retail area of the premises by walls and/or other partitions so as to restrict access to the tasting area only to those persons participating in the tasting activity. 
(d)  Purpose of tastings. A tasting permit is intended to allow a licensee to conduct wine and/or malt beverage tastings in conjunction with an educational or instructional activity, and is not intended to be part of the core operations of the licensee. 
(1)  Tastings are limited to no more than once weekly, per category of beverage eligible for tastings (i.e., malt beverage or wine). 
(2)  Tastings are limited to no more than two ounces per glass, with no more than eight ounces being served to an individual during a single day. 
(3)  Tastings may be held for wine or malt beverages, but not for both wine and malt beverages at the same time. 
(e)  [ Notification to director. ] No more than 30 days and no less than seven days prior to the holding of any tasting event, the licensee shall notify the director, in writing, that a tasting event will occur to include the date, time and specific location of the tasting event. Failure to so notify the director of the tasting event will result in the tasting event being an illegal consumption on the premises activity in violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 45) 
Secs. 4-191—4-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 4-215. - [Generally.] 
In addition to all of the actions which are prohibited as a matter of state law and otherwise in this chapter, the following prohibitions are also enacted as provided in this article. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , art. VIII) 
Sec. 4-216. - Minors and intoxicated persons. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law, no licensee shall sell or permit to be sold alcoholic beverages to any person under the legal drinking age as prescribed by state law. No licensee permitted to sell distilled spirits by the package shall permit any person under the legal drinking age as prescribed by state law to be in, frequent, or loiter about the licensed premises, unless this person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; however, this subsection shall not apply to persons who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises the sale, barter, exchange, giving, providing, or furnishing alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 46) 
Sec. 4-217. - Sale on election days. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by Act No. 750 (House Bill No. 247) approved April 10, 1985, amending O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(b), the sale of wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages, to wit: distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages, shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 47) 
Sec. 4-218. - Bring your own bottle (brown bagging) prohibited. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 48) 
Sec. 4-219. - Re-corkage of wine. 
Any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one resealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must: 
(1)  Be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises; 
(2)  Be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with; and 
(3)  Have a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
For purposes of interpreting this chapter, a bottle of wine resealed in accordance with this section shall not be considered an open beverage. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk so that the container is not readily accessible by the occupants of the vehicle while driving. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 49) 
Sec. 4-220. - No consumption/delivery outside premises. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any delivery of an alcoholic beverage to be made to and/or sales be made outside of the outlet. It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages from drive-in or service windows. 
(e)  Other than at properly permitted tastings as set forth in section 4-190, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of malt beverages or wine by the package, and it shall be unlawful for any licensee by the package to open for or break the package for a purchaser and/or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. The prohibition against the consumption of alcoholic beverages on a premises licensed for the sale of malt beverages or wine by the package shall not prohibit the consumption on the premises of a brew pub which sells barrels of beer to wholesale dealers for subsequent distribution. The prohibition against opening or breaking packages for a purchaser contained in this section shall not prohibit the use of growlers for the sale of malt beverages as provided for and in compliance with this chapter so long as the growler is not unsealed or consumed on the licensee's premises by the purchaser. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 50) 
Sec. 4-221. - Prohibited noise from establishments. 
It shall be unlawful for any establishment licensed under this chapter to make or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in the city and that is audible to a person of normal hearing ability from inside the building adjacent to the business in question. In no event, however, shall any such loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise be made by an establishment licensed under this chapter after the hours of 11:00 p.m. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 51) 
Sec. 4-222. - Breaking packages. 
(a)  No licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall sell or permit to be sold any single beer, wine cooler or similar alcoholic beverage that is customarily packaged for sale as part of a four-pack, six-pack, 12-pack, or similar package except as set forth in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Malt beverages may be sold in growlers. The filling or refilling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute a violation of this Section or the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. Growlers may only be filled by a licensee or an employee of a licensee with a malt beverage from a keg which keg was procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Prior to the actual sale, any malt beverage placed in a growler shall be securely sealed by the licensee or an employee of a licensee in such a manner as to make it visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 52) 
Sec. 4-223. - Refilling package. 
No licensee shall add to the contents of a bottle or refill an empty bottle or in any other manner misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the filling or refilling of growlers as provided for in this chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 53) 
Sec. 4-224. - Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited. 
(a)  Preamble and purpose. 
1)  Based upon the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; Austin, Texas; Seattle and Renton, Washington; New York, New York; Los Angeles, California; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences the mayor and council believes are relevant to the problems faced by this city, the mayor and council takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. 
2)  Moreover, it is the finding of the mayor and council that public nudity and semi-nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "erotic entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude or semi-nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare, and is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity or semi-nudity. 
(b)  Prohibited activities. Any establishment licensed under the provisions of this chapter is prohibited from permitting or engaging in the following activities: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person in any capacity in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment that provides or features nude or semi-nude or erotic dancing or the performance of obscene acts that simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts that are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The showing of any film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting any of the acts described in subsection (b)(2), above, or which are obscene under state law. 
(4)  The holding, promotion or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the above-prohibited conduct. 
(5)  Knowingly permitting of any person in the licensed premises to view from the licensed premises, by glass partition or other artifice, any of the above-prohibited conduct performed on-premises other than the licensed premises. 
6)  Knowingly permitting any person to remove any alcoholic beverage sold or dispensed on the licensed premises to adjacent or other premises for the purpose of view any of the above-prohibited conduct; provided, however, that this Code section shall not be applicable to a person who removes an alcoholic beverage to his home or place of abode. 
7)  The employment, encouragement, allowance or assistance of any person to engage in the above-prohibited conduct. 
(c)  Mainstream activity excluded. Notwithstanding the prohibitions in subsection (b), nothing in this chapter shall be or is intended to apply to theatrical or motion picture performance houses, museums, or to restaurants or places set apart for traditional family-oriented naturism where the consumption or service of alcohol is not a primary purpose or the mainstream activity of such establishment. The phrase "places provided or set apart for nudity" means as follows: places provided or set apart for traditional family oriented naturism including nudist parks, clubs, and resorts chartered by the American Association for Nude Recreation or affiliated with the Naturists Society or by traditional family oriented naturists groups. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 54) 
Secs. 4-225—4-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SUPPLEMENTAL NATURE OF CHAPTER 

Sec. 4-246. - [Provisions supplemental.] 
This chapter shall be deemed supplemental to all state laws and regulations related to alcohol. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and state law, the more restrictive shall govern. 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , art. IX) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 6-2. - Disposal of animal defecation. 
No defecation or manure shall be dumped, placed upon, or left upon any public street, alley, right-of-way, or any sidewalk within the corporate limits of the city; nor shall such defecation or manure be dumped or placed upon any open areas or lots within the corporate limits of the city. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of manure as fertilizer for lawns, gardens, or pastures in keeping with ordinary and customary practices; provided such use of manure as fertilizer does not create an unreasonable nuisance to others. 
(Ord. of 5-18-1999, § I(14-11)) 
Secs. 6-3—6-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 16, 2018 , amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to the dog control, consisted of § 6-23, and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 6, 1973; and the 1998 Code. 
State Law reference— Dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs (Mercedes' Law), O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 6-12-37. 

Sec. 6-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal that has been placed upon public property or within a public building or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food and water for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where the animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food means a sufficient quantity of noncontaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for a dog that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the dog in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. It should also be clean, dry, and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to the breed of the dog. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the dog to stand, turn around, lie down, and go in and out of the structure comfortably. The structure shall include a roof, provided that an animal services officer may exercise discretion in issuing citations for failure to provide shelter with a roof, if, in the good faith discretion of the animal control officer, the circumstances do not warrant the requirement of a roof. 
Adequate space means sufficient space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animals. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water with adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to, snow, ice, and rancid/contaminated water. 
Animal(s) means any domesticated animals and fowl. 
Animal at large means any animal not under restraint or voice control and off the property of its owner. If an animal has no known owner or keeper, then it shall be considered "at large" when on any public or private property. 
Animal care facility means any establishment where the primary business involves the care, treatment, or sale of animals, which shall include, but is not limited to, veterinarian offices, pet shops, animal shelters, kennels, animal boarding facilities, animal grooming facilities, or animal training facilities. 
Animal services division carries the same meaning as the animal control officer. 
Animal control officer means a City of Cumming Code Enforcement Officer or City of Cumming Police Officer, or any other employee of the City of Cumming duly authorized to pick up, restrain, or impound animals, and who is responsible for discharging such other duties or functions pertaining to animals as may be prescribed by this or any other ordinance, by state law, or by the lawful order of a city official authorized to supervise and direct animal control officers. The foregoing notwithstanding, the enforcement of this article may be the subject of an intergovernmental agreement with Forsyth County, Georgia, whether existing on the date of the adoption of this article or some future agreement, pursuant to which an animal control officer under the definitions in Forsyth County's animal control ordinances shall have jurisdiction and authority to enforce the City of Cumming's animal control ordinances within the City of Cumming. 
Animal control shelter means the facility designated by the mayor and council for the impoundment, restraint, care, detention and disposition of animals, which shall be the Forsyth County Georgia Animal Shelter until a resolution of the City of Cumming changes that designation. 
Animal under restraint means any animal secured by a leash or lead, or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure; or under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands, and the person being present with the animal; or an animal confined within a vehicle, parked, in motion, or in a crate or cage or otherwise secured in a pickup. 
Appropriate authority means the City of Cumming, the City of Cumming Police Department, the City of Cumming Code Enforcement Officer(s), any duly authorized agent thereof, the State of Georgia, any city, any county, or any state or subdivision thereof. In the event this article is being enforced pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement with Forsyth County, Georgia, this term shall also mean the Forsyth County Sheriff's Office, Forsyth County Code Enforcement, and any duly authorized agent thereof. 
Attack means any biting or attempted biting or other action by an animal that places a person in danger of imminent bodily harm. An attack also means the actual biting of another animal. 
Cat means any age feline of the domesticated type. 
Certificate means a certificate of vaccination on a form furnished or approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
City means the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
County means Forsyth County, Georgia. 
Dangerous dog control ordinance means article III of this chapter. 
Dog means a dog, of either sex, vaccinated or not vaccinated against rabies. 
Domesticated animals means animals that are accustomed to living in or about the habitation of people, including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. 
Feral animal means an animal that has escaped from a domestic or captive status and is more or less living as a wild animal, or is born of a feral animal. 
Governing authority means the governing body or official in which the legislative powers of a local government are vested. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command. 
Habitually means an action or state that lasts for or is repeated over an extended duration. 
Local government means the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Mayor and council mean the Mayor and Council of the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity owning, keeping, harboring, possessing, or having custody or control, or acting as caretaker or custodian of any domesticated animal, having a right of property in an animal, or any person who permits an animal to remain on his premises within the City of Cumming. 
Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, municipality, county, society, or association. 
Rabies vaccination tag means a tag furnished or approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources and which tag shall be worn by the vaccinated dog at all times. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, records of any county or municipal animal control agency, records of any county board of health, records of any federal, state or local court, or records of an animal control officer as provided for in this division. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vaccinate, inoculate means the injection of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine by a veterinarian into the proper site of an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Veterinary Biologies Control Section license number approval stamped on the label of the container and having been approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Vaccine means an injectable material containing killed or attenuated rabies virus, licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture, Veterinary Biologies Section, and approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. Vaccine used for the purpose of this rule shall be stored at the temperature prescribed on the purchase label. Outdated vaccine shall not be used. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a degree of doctor of veterinary medicine (DVM). 
Vicious animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more attacks of such severity as to cause physical injury. An animal shall also be considered vicious if it makes an unprovoked attack on human beings or other domesticated animals. The term "vicious animal" shall also mean an animal that because of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure other living creatures without provocation. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-24. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his possession to keep the animal under control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian. For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under control when it is confined within a vehicle; is secured by a leash or other device held by a competent person; is under voice control; or is properly confined within an enclosure with permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
(b)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal within any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. 
(c)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another male animal except for planned breeding. 
(d)  Every animal shall be restrained or controlled so as to prevent it from chasing vehicles or attacking persons or other domestic animals. 
(e)  The owner or custodian of any animal that is proven to be at large shall be in violation of this section, regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of lack of knowledge of the offense at the time it occurs. 
(f)  Any such animal at large may be impounded by the animal control officer or an authorized representative thereof. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-25. - Cruelty to animals; fighting animals. 
No person shall, by act, omission or neglect, cause unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death to any animal. This section shall not apply to the killing of animals raised for the purpose of providing food, nor does it apply to any person who shall hunt wild animals in compliance with the game and fish laws of the State of Georgia. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to the killing or injuring of animals for humane purposes or in the furtherance of medical or scientific research or in the necessary defense of one's person or personal property. 
(a)  Whoever willfully or purposefully kills, abuses, maims or disfigures any animal or willfully or maliciously administers poison to an animal or exposes any poisonous substance with intent that the substance shall be taken and swallowed by an animal shall be in violation of this article. Cropping, docking, and dew claw removal performed by a veterinarian shall not be considered maiming or disfiguring. 
(b)  Whoever overloads, overdrives, tortures, torments or deprives an animal of adequate food or beats, mutilates, hobbles or kills any animal or causes such acts to be done, or carries in or upon a vehicle or otherwise any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner, shall be deemed in violation of this article. This section shall not prohibit the hobbling of an animal for legitimate training or approved medical care purposes. 
(c)  Whoever confines an animal and fails to supply adequate food, adequate water, or fails to provide the animal with access to adequate space or adequate shelter, or abandons any animal to die, or otherwise confines the animal in inhumane conditions shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(d)  No person shall: 
(1)  Own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of unlawful fighting. 
(2)  Build, make, maintain or keep a pit on premises owned by him or occupied by him, or allow a pit to be built, made, maintained or kept on such premises, for the purpose of an exhibition of animal fighting. 
(3)  In any manner encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an exhibition of animal fighting. 
(4)  Charge admission to, be an assistant, umpire or participant at, or be present as a spectator to any exhibition of animal fighting. 
(e)  No owner of any dog contracting distemper or parvo shall allow such dog to remain untreated or fail to take prompt steps to have the dog euthanized. 
(f)  Any animal control officer may impound any animal that has been treated in a cruel manner. 
(g)  A person who is convicted of animal cruelty as provided in this article may not own, possess, or have on his premises in the City of Cumming any animal for one year from the date of conviction. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a time in excess of one year, should circumstances warrant. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-26. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement authority of this chapter shall be vested with any animal control officer of the City of Cumming Police Department, who may exercise good faith discretion in the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this article. Enforcement shall be based upon a complaint lodged with an animal control officer or City of Cumming Police Department, or observations made by an animal control officer. 
(b)  The foregoing notwithstanding, pursuant to any intergovernmental agreement in place on the date this article is adopted, or any future intergovernmental agreement, enforcement of this article may be made by officers of the Forsyth County Sheriff's Office, or a code enforcement officer of Forsyth County, Georgia, and said enforcement may be based on complaints lodged with any such enforcement personnel or the personnel identified in subsection 6-26(a). 
(c)  In carrying out the duties of this chapter an animal control officer may employ equipment, including, but not limited to, control poles, nets, leashes of any construction, chemical capture devices, snakes tongs, oleoresin capsicum aerosols, snake hooks, humane traps, collapsible batons, firearms and metal carrying cages. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-27. - Vicious animals—Precautions to be taken by owners. 
(a)  Vicious animal. 
(1)  The words "vicious animal" shall mean any animal which attacks, bites or injures humans, other animals without provocation; or which, because of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure other living creatures without provocation; or any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or domesticated animals by one or more attacks without provocation of such severity to cause physical injury. An animal that bites its owner is exempted from this section, except the mandatory reporting requirement of any local ordinance or state law shall still apply. 
(b)  Exception: An animal is not considered vicious if it attacks, bites or menaces: 
(1)  Anyone attacking its owner; 
(2)  Unlawful trespassers on the property of its owner; 
(3)  Any person or animal that has tormented or abused it; 
(4)  If it is defending its young or other animal; or 
(5)  Any non-domesticated animal being hunted as part of lawful hunting activities. 
(c)  An animal will not be classified as vicious simply by nature of its size, breed, phenotype or other physical characteristics. 
(d)  No person owning or having custody or control of any animal known to be vicious shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(e)  For owners of vicious animals who maintain their animal out-of-doors, a portion of their property shall be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence the vicious animal must be provided adequate shelter of adequate space. The pen or kennel shall not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides, with a secure top attached to all sides, and the sides must be securely set into the ground or onto a concrete pad or securely attached to a wire bottom, out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape on its own volition. The gate must be securely locked. 
(f)  A warning sign (e.g., BEWARE OF VICIOUS ANIMAL) shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious animal is on the premises and if said vicious animal is kept in a secure enclosure such signs will be posted on all four sides of said enclosure. It is the intention of this article to make all persons who have legitimate business at the place where a vicious animal is kept to be fully warned that such vicious animal is present. 
(g)  No vicious animal shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post or building. 
(h)  Whenever outside of its enclosure, but on the owner's property, a vicious animal must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for any vicious animal on the streets or in any other public place, at any time, unless, in addition to the other requirements of this article, such animal is humanely and securely muzzled and in charge of a competent person to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. 
(j)  The owner of any vicious animal which is not confined in a building or secure enclosure, or any person who shall release, either willfully or through a failure to exercise due care or control, or take such animal out of such building or secure enclosure in a manner which is likely to cause injury to another person or damage to the property of another person, shall be in violation of this article, and such animal shall be permanently confined or humanely euthanized. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-28. - Notice to owners of impounded animals; redemption by owner. 
(a)  Any animal seized or impounded under any provision of this article shall be detained in the animal control shelter or any other such facility that the city may so designate. 
(b)  Upon receipt of any impounded animal having a microchip or wearing a tag, the animal control officer shall immediately make diligent efforts to ascertain the identity of the animal's owner and shall, within three business days of receipt, telephone the owner to give notice of the impoundment or notify the owner by personal contact or notice attached to the residence of the owner. 
(c)  The owner of the impounded animal may, after receiving such notice, regain possession of the animal upon payment of all applicable fees specified in this article. Such redemption shall not affect any criminal liability of the owner which may exist with respect to any violation of this article and shall not preclude proceedings against the owner for the purpose of pursuing sanctions under this article. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-29. - Consequences of animal impounded and not claimed. 
If for any reason an animal is impounded and not claimed by the owner after proper notification is made, the animal shall be considered abandoned and the following subsections shall apply. 
(1)  If the animal is not claimed by the owner within five days of being telephoned or personally contacted or seven days of a notice being left at the owners residence, the animal shall be deemed abandoned and representatives of the animal control shelter may at their discretion adopt such animal or dispose of such animal in accordance with state law. If the owner cannot be located, or no residence of the owner identified, the animal shall be presumed abandoned within seven days of impoundment. 
(2)  If any of the time periods in the subsection (1) of this section expire, the owner shall be deemed to have given his consent to the adoption of the impounded animal or to give his consent to the disposal of the animal in a humane fashion in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. All rights of ownership in such animal will immediately cease and the owner shall have no further claims to such animal. 
(3)  If an animal is impounded, and through its appearance seems to have been abandoned or is stray, such animal will be kept for a period of five days before it will be considered for adoption or euthanized. The appearance of being abandoned or stray would include, but not be limited to, the following: no collar, tag, brand, microchipping, or other identifiable marks, an appearance of being malnourished, excessively dirty or mange like fur coat, or any other condition that would lead the animal control officer to conclude that such animal is a stray. 
(4)  Any animal impounded which is found to be diseased or injured and whose ownership is unknown or is relinquished in writing, or whose owner cannot be immediately contacted, may be immediately euthanized if in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian the severity of the injury or disease of the animal indicates that euthanasia is a humane course of action. 
(5)  Feral and unowned animals which have been captured by or come to be in the custody of the animal services division shall be kept for a period of 24 hours before being euthanized or released for adoption, as determined in the discretion of the animal services division. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-30. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal control shelter may offer for adoption or placement with any person or any organization approved by the city or, in the event this article is being enforced pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement with Forsyth County, Georgia, the County, an animal otherwise scheduled to be disposed of (euthanized) under the provisions of this chapter. No animal impounded shall be released to any person or organization for the purpose of animal experimentation. Any person or organization adopting an animal from the animal control shelter shall pay the animal control shelter for rabies inoculation, necessary medical treatment, and any other administrative fees designated by the city. Additionally, any person seeking to adopt an animal from the animal control shelter shall provide a written certification disclosing any convictions for animal cruelty or animal neglect under any federal, state, or local laws. No animal may be adopted from the animal control shelter by any person who, within ten years from the conviction or plea date, was convicted or pled guilty (to include a plea of nolo contendere), to animal cruelty or animal neglect whether such conviction is a felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance-based conviction under any federal, state or local law. 
(b)  All dogs and cats will be spayed or neutered at or immediately prior to the time of adoption if the animal is approximately eight weeks of age and weighing at least two pounds, unless otherwise recommended by a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  The requirement set forth in subsection 6-30(b) shall not apply if the owner of the dog or cat claims or presents evidence that such dog or cat is the property of such person or organization. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-31. - Authority to euthanize injured or diseased animals. 
Any dog, cat or other domestic animal injured upon the public right-of-way is subject to euthanasia by a competent licensed veterinary authority or animal control officer, depending upon the extent of injury to or disease of such animal, or, in the alternative, if such animal is not claimed by the owner thereof within a reasonable time, in the interest of humane treatment. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-32. - Business license verification regarding tip line. 
Any person applying for a city business license to operate an animal care facility shall be required to certify on a form provided by the city that they are familiar with the City of Cumming Police Department, Forsyth County Sheriff's Office, and/or animal services division online and telephonic resources for reporting animal neglect or cruelty and, if observed, will report instances of same. A failure to report an instance of animal neglect or animal cruelty may result in: 
(1)  Revocation of an existing business license, 
(2)  Inability to secure a future business license, 
(3)  A citation for failure to report in violation of the certification to do so. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-33. - State rabies vaccination tag; county registration required for dogs and cats. 
(a)  Every dog or cat three months of age or older shall be vaccinated against rabies. Dogs and cats will be revaccinated one year later. When dogs or cats one year of age or older are vaccinated with vaccines accepted by the state, county or department for providing a three-year duration of immunity, boosters will be required every three years. Otherwise, boosters shall be required annually. 
(b)  All dogs are required to wear a collar containing owner information at all times, except as exempted by section 14-105. Owner information contained in a microchip shall be acceptable to comply with this requirement; but shall not be a replacement for a visible collar. Dogs age three months or older are required to wear a collar and a current rabies tag at all times. 
(c)  A $5.00 fee will be assessed at the time of all rabies vaccinations (cats and dogs) for registration purposes. All dogs and cats shall be registered with Forsyth County or the city. If a dog or cat is vaccinated for rabies by a veterinarian outside of the Forsyth County, it is the responsibility of the owner to register the animal with the animal services division and pay the appropriate fee. If an owner or custodian of a dog or cat provides written verification that, at the time of rabies vaccination, his dog or cat has been spayed or neutered, such verification shall result in their registration fee being reduced to $3.00. 
(d)  All veterinarians receiving fees under this section shall deliver such fees to the city by no later than the 15th day of the subsequent month after receipt. If enforcement of this article is being accomplished pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement between the City of Cumming and Forsyth County, Georgia, then such fees shall be remitted to Forsyth County. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 6-34. - Confinement of dogs or other animals. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall be responsible for enforcement of all regulations pertaining to confinement of dogs or other animals. 
(b)  The owner of any dog or other animal as defined in this article shall confine or cause to be confined such dog or animal as prescribed in this section: 
(1)  A dog or other animal which has bitten a person (or other animal) shall be confined for a period of ten days following the date of the bite, in accordance with subsections 6-67(b), (c), (d) or (e), whichever is applicable. 
(2)  A dog or other animal, whether vaccinated or not, having signs suggestive of rabies shall be confined in isolation in a humane and escape-proof enclosure until its death or until its freedom from suspicion of having rabies is established and its release is authorized by an animal control officer. 
(3)  A dog or other animal not vaccinated and bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal shall be immediately euthanized or if the owner is unwilling to euthanize the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in an approved kennel, or other confinement area approved by an animal control officer, for six months shall be enforced. One month prior to release, the dog shall be vaccinated according to prescribed methods. 
(4)  Any dog or other animal which, as evidenced by its rabies vaccination tag, is properly and currently vaccinated for rabies and which is bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal may be revaccinated, confined in an approved manner for 60 days, and then released if no signs of rabies are evident. 
(5)  Every dog or other animal, whether vaccinated or not, shall be kept in a quarantined area confined at the owner's or custodian's premises during the entire quarantine period, unless other provisions deemed adequate to the animal control officer are made. 
(6)  Any dog less than three months old may be confined to the owner's premises, provided such permission is granted by the animal services division. 
(7)  Any dog brought into the city for a permanent stay from outside the city shall be confined or on leash until vaccinated as provided for by this chapter. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Secs. 6-35—6-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOGS AND VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means a City of Cumming Code Enforcement Officer or City of Cumming Police Officer, or any other employee of the City of Cumming duly authorized to pick up, restrain, or impound animals, and who is responsible for discharging such other duties or functions pertaining to animals as may be prescribed by this or any other ordinance, by state law, or by the lawful order of a city official authorized to supervise and direct animal control officers. The foregoing notwithstanding, the enforcement of this article may be the subject of an intergovernmental agreement with Forsyth County, pursuant to which an animal control officer under the definitions in Forsyth County's animal control ordinances shall have jurisdiction and authority to enforce the City of Cumming's animal control ordinances within the City of Cumming. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by or under contract for the State of Georgia or any county, municipal corporation, or other political subdivision of the state for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians that operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this article. 
Animal control board means the Forsyth County Animal Control Board in the event there is an intergovernmental agreement for the enforcement of animal control between the City of Cumming and Forsyth County, Georgia. Otherwise it shall mean a board consisting of: 
(1)  A duly licensed Georgia veterinarian having a practice in the City of Cumming that is nominated and approved by the mayor and council; 
(2)  An individual nominated and approved by the mayor and council with the only qualification being that the individual be an adult resident of the City of Cumming; and 
(3)  A third appointee that is selected by the following methodology: 
(i)  The first and second appointees above shall nominate no less than two and no more than five individuals; 
(ii)  Each such nominee shall be an active member of a Forsyth County, Georgia animal rescue organization, and 
(iii)  The pool of nominees shall be presented to the mayor and council who shall select one of the nominees as a board member. 
Terms shall be set by resolution upon the creation of any such board, and following the expiration of those initial terms, reappointments shall occur and those appointed shall serve two-year terms. During the term of service, an appointee may be removed by the mayor and council with or without cause. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust, owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a dog within the county. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure on the owner's property for keeping a dangerous dog or vicious dog in a locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and, in the case of a vicious dog, a secure top, and if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 2(Exh. B) ) 
Sec. 6-67. - Investigations by animal control officer; owner's responsibilities. 
(a)  Duty to investigate. Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within an animal control officer's jurisdiction, such officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(b)  Owner's responsibilities for dog without current valid rabies vaccination. If a dog, without a current and valid rabies vaccination, bites any person, it shall be the duty of the owner having possession and knowledge of such to arrange for and bear the cost of confinement of such dog in a veterinary hospital for a period of ten days in order to observe the dog for rabies. If the veterinary hospital determines the dog to be rabid, then the dog is to be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. If the dog is found to not be rabid, such dog may be claimed upon proof of a current rabies vaccination and an enclosure deemed proper by the animal control officer. When the ten-day observation period is satisfied, the owner of such dog shall have 72 hours to claim such dog. 
(c)  Owner's responsibilities for dog with current valid rabies vaccination. If a dog, with a current and valid rabies vaccination, bites any person, it shall be the duty of the owner, or person having possession of such dog and knowledge of such bite, to confine such dog for a ten-day period in an enclosure deemed proper by the animal control officer. 
(d)  Removal from enclosure after confinement period generally. A dog, which has not been classified a dangerous or vicious dog, may be removed from the proper enclosure restriction after satisfying the requirements of the ten-day confinement period. 
(e)  Continued confinement for dangerous or vicious dog. The owner of a dog, which has been classified a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, must continue confinement of the dog in a proper enclosure as long as the dog is so classified. 
(f)  Refusal to comply. In the event an owner of a dog fails or refuses to abide by this section, the animal control officer is hereby authorized and empowered to confiscate such dog, confine it at the expense of such owner at a veterinary hospital for such time it deems necessary in order to observe whether the dog is rabid. In the event the veterinary hospital determines the dog to be rabid, then such dog is to be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 2(Exh. B) ) 
Sec. 6-68. - Procedures for classification as dangerous dogs or vicious dogs. 
(a)  Applicability for enforcement purposes. Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(b)  Notice requirement. When an animal control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the animal control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the animal control board on the animal control officer's determination within seven days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall also provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the animal control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of an animal control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the animal control officer. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under O.C.G.A., title 16, chapter 5. 
(c)  Confinement during pendency of hearing or appeal. During the pendency of any hearing or appeal of a determination that a dog is a dangerous or vicious dog as provided for in this section, the owner of such dog shall cause such dog to be confined at the expense of such owner of such dog, at a veterinary hospital, licensed kennel facility, or in a proper enclosure deemed suitable by the animal control officer. 
(d)  Authority of animal control officer to confiscate and confine. If an owner fails or refuses to abide by subsection (c) of this section, the animal control officer is authorized and empowered to confiscate such animal, confine it at the expense of such owner at a veterinary hospital, kennel facility, or proper enclosure deemed suitable by the animal control officer during the pendency of any hearing or appeal mentioned in the subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Hearing. When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this Code section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received, provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the animal control board for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the animal control board shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the animal control board shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's determination. 
(f)  Notice of determination by animal control board. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal control board shall mail written notice of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to subsection (h), the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(g)  Retrieval of dog from veterinary hospital. After notification from the hearing board that a dog has been determined to be a dangerous or vicious dog, the owner of such dog shall have three business days within which to pick up his dog from the veterinary hospital, provided the owner is in compliance with all requirements of the animal control ordinance. After such notification, the owner may appeal from any adverse decision rendered by the hearing board in such manner as provided by the laws of the state. Written notification of such an appeal shall be given immediately to the county animal services division. 
(h)  [Limitation.] A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided in this section, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before October 15, 2018, shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 2(Exh. B) ) 
Sec. 6-69. - Summons. 
Upon a complaint lodged with the animal services division regarding any section of this article, a summons may be issued requiring the owner of any domesticated animal, or any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions set forth in this article to appear before the judge of the City of Cumming Municipal Court on a day and time certain to answer for the violation of this article. If such violation of this article has not been witnessed by an officer of the city, a subpoena may be issued to the person making the complaint, requiring such person to appear on the day and time of the hearing set by the court to testify on behalf of the city. 
( Ord. of 10-6-2018, § 2(Exh. B) ) 
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions other than those functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include without limitation: 
(1)  Firefighting services; 
(2)  Police services; 
(3)  Emergency medical services; 
(4)  Rescue, engineering and warning services; 
(5)  Communications; 
(6)  Defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons, to include weapons of mass destruction; 
(7)  Evacuation of persons from stricken areas; 
(8)  Emergency welfare services; 
(9)  Consequence management functions to include victim services; 
(10)  Emergency transportation; 
(11)  Plant protection; 
(12)  Temporary restoration of public utility services; 
(13)  Other functions related to civilian population; and 
(14)  All other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare, or economic well-being of the citizens of this state arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this state resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or by-product, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 Stat. 919, 42 USC 2011 et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside this state, substantially affecting the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this state. 
Energy resources means all forms of energy or power including, without limitation, oil, gasoline, and other petroleum products; natural or synthetic gas; electricity in all forms and from all sources; and other fuels of any description, except wood. 
Pandemic influenza emergency means the declaration by the World Health Organization of at least a Phase 5 Pandemic Alert for influenza occurring in the United States or the State of Georgia or the declaration by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of at least a Category 2 Pandemic Severity Index for influenza occurring in the United States or the state. 
Public health emergency means the occurrence or imminent threat of an illness or health condition that is reasonably believed to be caused by bioterrorism or the appearance of a novel or previously controlled or eradicated infectious agent or biological toxin and poses a high probability of any of the following harms: 
(1)  A large number of deaths in the affected population; 
(2)  A large number of serious or long-term disabilities in the affected population; or 
(3)  Widespread exposure to an infectious or toxic agent that poses a significant risk of substantial future harm to a large number of people in the affected population. 
State of emergency means the condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Code 1998, § 30-31; Ord. of 9-17-1992, § I) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-3. 
Sec. 8-20. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1998, § 30-36; Ord. of 9-17-1992, § VI) 
Sec. 8-21. - Office of the county emergency management/civil defense director. 
It is the desire and intent of the mayor and council that the city be a part of the Cumming-Forsyth County Emergency Management Agency/Civil Defense Department. The county commissioners, with concurrence of the mayor and council, shall nominate for appointment by the governor a director of emergency management/civil defense for the city and county. When appointed, the director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management/civil defense. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the Cumming-Forsyth County Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for the emergency functions set forth in section 8-19. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the city for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the EMA/civil defense office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the city emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices. 
(6)  To maintain, with the authority of governing officials, the facility to be used as the civil defense office and emergency operating center (EOC). 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the EOC staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of governing officials. 
(Code 1998, § 30-32; Ord. of 9-17-1992, § II) 
Sec. 8-22. - City-county emergency management agency/civil defense department. 
(a)  The Cumming-Forsyth County Emergency Management Agency/Civil Defense Department shall be established around existing city departments, and the emergency functions described in section 8-19 are assigned as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for assisting the civil defense in developing appropriate annexes to the local EOP for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 1998, § 30-33; Ord. of 9-17-1992, § III) 
Sec. 8-23. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency that may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor, separately or jointly with the chairperson of the county commissioners, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management/civil defense and to assume direct operational control over all emergency resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use, or condemn property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed, and for reimbursement for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 30-34; Ord. of 9-17-1992, § IV) 
Sec. 8-24. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county and cities in the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same authority and immunities as city employees, except law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1998, § 30-35; Ord. of 9-17-1992, § V) 
Secs. 8-25—8-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means any mechanized and/or electronic device or set of devices intended to detect and signal the need for police at a premises in which such device or set of devices is installed. 
Alarm user means, with respect to any premises, any individual, partnership, association, public or private corporation, governmental entity, or other person or group who owns, leases, manages or otherwise controls such premises, whether such ownership, leasing, management or control is shared with other persons and whether it is direct or indirect. 
Auto-dialer means any device or equipment designed or intended to call a predesignated telephone number in the event of an activation of the alarm system. 
False alarm means the transmittal of a request for response or assistance to the police department under circumstances where no such response or assistance appeared to be reasonably necessary at the time of such transmittal, and where such transmittal is made either automatically by an alarm system or by an individual in reliance upon an alarm system. 
Police officer means any sworn member of the city police department. 
Premises means any structure or other improvement to real property or any portion of any such structure or other improvement intended for separate use and occupancy apart from other portions thereof. 
Response means the dispatch of a police officer to the premises where an alarm system has been activated. 
Responsible person means, with respect to any premises, any individual who owns, leases, manages or otherwise controls such premises, whether such ownership, leasing, management or control is shared with other persons and whether it is direct or indirect. 
Transmit means to send either manually or automatically, by any device or method, a signal to request a response or assistance from the police department. 
(Code 1998, § 42-36; Ord. of 12-19-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 8-53. - Maintenance of alarm systems. 
With respect to any premises, it shall be the joint and separate responsibility of each responsible person to cause any alarm system upon or within such premises to be maintained in a good state of repair so as to prevent the transmittal of a false alarm or, in the alternative, to disconnect the alarm system. 
(Code 1998, § 42-37; Ord. of 12-19-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 8-54. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be a violation of this article for anyone to: 
(1)  Transmit a false alarm. 
(2)  Notify the police department directly through its emergency phone lines of any alarm activation by means of any auto-dialer, telephonic recording, message, signal or warning. 
(3)  Activate, except in the event of an actual emergency, any alarm system for the purpose of summoning a member of the police department, or to aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(Code 1998, § 42-38; Ord. of 12-19-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 8-55. - Notification. 
For the first four violations of section 8-54 within a calendar year at any premises, there shall be no penalty assessed. A first and all subsequent false alarms to a premises within a four-hour period shall be considered as one violation. The police department shall notify any responsible person at the premises by United States mail following the occurrence of the fourth false alarm. Notice shall be deemed received by any responsible person if sent via United States mail addressed to the alarm user. 
(Code 1998, § 42-39; Ord. of 12-19-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 8-56. - Penalties. 
(a)  For the fifth and all subsequent false alarms within a calendar year at a premises, a fine of $50.00 shall be charged. 
(b)  Any responsible person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article may be summoned to the municipal court for each violation and/or noncompliance and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Code 1998, § 42-40; Ord. of 12-19-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 8-57. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of section 8-54 shall not apply to newly installed alarm systems that have been connected for less than 30 days and have been installed by a state certified and licensed alarm technician. A responsible person at the premises must maintain written proof, in the form of an invoice, of the date of installation of an alarm system for exemption under this section. 
(b)  The provisions of section 8-54 shall not apply to the owner or management company of a premises when such premises are leased for use unless the alarm system is under the control of the owner or management company. 
(Code 1998, § 42-41; Ord. of 12-19-1995, § 6) 
Chapter 10 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 12 - FEES 

Secs. 12-1—12-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-4. - Alcoholic beverages. 
The fees, taxes, or charges required by chapter 4 are as follows: 

 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(1) , § 8; Ord. of 11-19-2013 , § 2) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted March 19, 2013 , repealed and enacted a new ch. 4, including new fees pertaining to alcoholic beverages as set forth by § 8 of said ordinance. Therefore, § 12-4 has been repealed and replaced in its entirety as herein set out and subsequently amended. Former § 12-4 derived from Code 1998, §§ 6-3, 6-43, 6-101, 6-131, 6-172, 6-202; and §§ 1.4, 1.10, 2.1, 3.1, and 4.2 of an ordinance adopted Apr. 21, 1992. 
Sec. 12-5. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-6. - Animals (Reserved). 
Secs. 12-7—12-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-12. - Effect of chapter 12. 
When a fee is provided for in this chapter but no requirement exists elsewhere in this Code that such fee be paid to the city, the inclusion of such fee in this chapter shall be a requirement that such fee be paid to the city. 
Sec. 12-13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-14. - Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations. 
The fees, taxes or charges required by chapter 14 are as follows: 
(1)  Miscellaneous (reserved). 
(2)  Occupational license. 
a.  Occupational license tax schedule. 

 
State Law reference— Determination of tax on basis of employees, O.C.C.A. § 48-13-10. 
b.  Occupational license administrative fee, $25.00. 
(3)  Depository financial institutions business license tax. 
a.  0.25 percent. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other provision, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(4)  Insurance license fees. 
a.  $40.00 or such greater fee as is authorized by state law. 
b.  For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 14-102, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00 or such greater fee as is authorized by state law. 
c.  For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under chapter 14, article IV, operated and maintained by a business organization engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, the insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 or such greater fee as is authorized by state law per location for each year. 
d.  Independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 14-101, $100.00 for each such location within the city. 
e.  Gross premium direct tax on life, accident and sickness insurers: one percent. 
f.  Gross premium direct on other insurers: 2.5 percent. 
(5)  Hotel, motel and lodging tax. Five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel. 
(6)  Bona fide amusement games. 
a.  License fee. 
1.  If the application is made between January 1 and June 30 of any calendar year, $500.00 per coin operated bona fide amusement game. 
2.  If the application is made between July and December of any calendar year, $250.00 per coin operated bona fide amusement game. 
b.  License application fee, $25.00 per coin operated bona fide amusement game for which a license is sought. 
(7)  Adult entertainment establishments. 
a.  Employee investigation fee ..... $50.00 
b.  Change of location fee ..... $2,000.00 
c.  Establishment license application fee ..... $500.00 
d.  Initial establishment license fee ..... $5,000.00 
e.  Establishment license renewal fee ..... $2,000.00 
(8)  Cable. 
a.  Cable or video franchise fee, five percent of gross revenues generated within the city. 
(9)  Pawnbrokers (Reserved). 
(10)  Yard and garage sales (Reserved). 
(11)  Vehicles for hire. 
a.  Taxicab or limousine regulatory fee ..... $50.00 
b.  Taxicab or limousine drive's driver's background fee ..... 50.00 
c.  Taxicab or limousine driver's permit fee ..... 10.00 
provided, however, that if applicant brings two pictures of himself to the city administrator\5.00 
(12)  Massage parlors and employees. 
a.  Massage establishment fee ..... 250.00 
b.  Work permit fee ..... 25.00 
(Code 1998, §§ 10-58, 10-59, 10-87, 10-93, 10-94; 22-35, 22-37, 22-41, 22-137—22-141, 22-224, 22-225; Ord. of 10-18-1994, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-33, 22-34, 22-38); Ord. of 2-18-1997, §§ I-8(a), (b), (d), I-9, I-14, I-15, I-17; Res. of 6-24-1999; Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-303); Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-324); Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 3; Ord. of 2-19-2008, § 1(26-1); Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 2(Exh. B) ) 
Secs. 12-15—12-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-20. - Streets, sidewalks and other public places. 
The fees, taxes or charges required by chapter 20 are as follows: 
(1)  Public right-of-way work permit ..... $50.00 
(Code 1998, §§ 58-57, 58-61; Ord. of 6-13-1989, §§ 3, 10; Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 6) 
Sec. 12-21. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-22. - Traffic and vehicles (Reserved). 
Secs. 12-23—12-100. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-101. - Land development. 
The fees required by subpart B, chapter 111, excepted are as follows: 
PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE  APRIL 21, 2006 
Plan submittal 
Commercial and Residential Development 
Site plan submittal fee: $50.00; revisions and resubmittals $50.00 each. 
Building plan submittal fee: $50.00; revisions and resubmittals $50.00 each. 
Sign plan submittal fee: $50.00; revisions and resubmittals $50.00 each. 
Building permits 
Residential and agricultural: 
The building permit fee for residential and agricultural structures shall be based on the value of the structure and according to the following schedule which is Schedule K of the standard building code. The value is calculated at $40.00 per square foot for heated area and $10.00 per square foot for unheated areas such as unfinished basements, porches, decks, patios, etc. Agricultural structures not intended for human occupancy are calculated at $3.00 per square foot. 
(Take the above totals and go to building valuation chart for fees.) 
Apartments, condominiums, townhouses: 
The building permit fee for all Apartments, Condominiums and Townhouses shall be $0.20 per square foot for all enclosed areas (heated or unheated) and $0.10 per square foot for loading docks, open storage buildings; (example: truck or equipment sheds), etc. Retaining wall: $0.06 per square foot. 
Permits for existing interior or exterior structural shall be $0.20 per square foot. 
Commercial: 
The building permit fee for all commercial buildings shall be $0.20 per square foot for all enclosed areas (heated or unheated) and $0.10 per square foot for loading docks, open storage buildings; (example: truck or equipment sheds), etc. Retaining wall: $0.06 per square foot. 
Permits for existing interior or exterior structural shall be $0.20 per square foot. 
Minimum building permit fee: 
Residential\$30.00 
Commercial\$40.00 
Building permit expires 18 months from date of issue. 

 
Penalties - When work is started prior to obtaining a valid permit for such work, the permit fee shall be doubled. 
Plumbing, electrical and mechanical residential only. 
For (one-step permitting) Residential - new construction only. 
The one-step permitting procedure allows the Building Contractor to purchase all the necessary permits. The sub-contractors must fill out an affidavit form stating that they are responsible for the particular job, prior to requesting an inspection. Must also provide valid Georgia State Certification card and current Georgia Business License. 

 
Plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits for commercial: 
Must be permitted individually by the licensed contractor prior to any installation. Fees are determined by items installed. Failure to permit will result in doubled fees. 
Reinspection Fee - $25.00 for each reinspection needed. 
Miscellaneous: 
Certificate of occupancy 
($25.00 when building permit is a minimum fee) 
($45.00 when no building permit is required) 
Communication towers/antennas $600.00; any additional accessory structures (co-locate), each\$600.00 
An electrical permit and building permit must also be purchased if applicable. 
Demolition fee: 
0 up to 100,000 cubic feet\$50.00 
100,000 cubic feet and over\$100.00 
Requires inspection prior to demolition to determine safety requirements. 
Fence, per 100 feet (minimum fee $30.00) inspection required\$7.00 
Moved structures\$200.00 
Signs, per $1,000.00 of the actual bid price of the job or fraction thereof\$40.00 
Minimum permit fee\$40.00 
Sign less than 15 square feet does not require a permit. 
Signs requiring electricity must also obtain an electrical permit. 
Swimming pools, per square foot\$0.20 
Pool decking, per square foot\$0.10 
Tents: 
Per square foot, commercial\$0.05 
Minimum permit fee\$40.00 
Tent less than 120 square feet does not require a permit. 
Mobile home or office permits: 
HUD certified mobile home or mobile office permits, temporary storage\$75.00 
Relocation of non-HUD certified mobile home or mobile office permits\$75.00 
These mobile home or office permit fees include the electrical permit fee. 

 
VARIANCE FEES/CONDITIONAL USE 
Residential\$400.00 
Commercial\$750.00 
Appeal to City Council: 
Residential\$400.00 
Commercial (including, multifamily)\$500.00 
Plumbing permits: 
Commercial, residential (additions and remodeling), and others 

 
Electrical permit: 
Commercial, residential (additions and remodeling) and others 
Service amperage, subpanels figured same as service panel 
0 — 99\$5.00 
100 — 199\$7.00 
200 — 299\$10.00 
300 — 399\$12.00 
400 — 499\$14.00 
500 and up, plus $0.05 per amp above 500\$15.00 
Motors less than 1 HP\$3.00 
1 — 5 HP\$5.00 
5.5 — 10 HP\$7.00 
10.5 — 20 HP\$12.00 
20.5 — 50 HP\$16.00 
50.5 and up, plus $0.05 per HP above 50.5\$18.00 
Transformers, heaters, furnaces and appliances 
Less than 1 KW\$3.00 
1 — 3.5 KW\$5.00 
4 — 9.5 KW\$7.00 
10 — 24.5 KW\$12.00 
25 KW and up, plus $0.15 KW above 25\$12.00 
Electrical miscellaneous (temporary electric service is included with building permit) 
Swimming pools\$40.00 
Receptacle/switches, each\$0.50 
Fluorescent commercial fixtures, each\$0.50 
Showcase/meat case fixtures, each\$5.00 
Walk-in cooler, each\$10.00 
Floodlights (below 300 W), each\$0.50 
Floodlights (above 300 W), each\$2.00 
Gasoline pumps, each\$10.00 
Air conditioning/heat pump/furnace, each\$5.00 
Water heater, each\$4.00 
Clothes dryer, each\$4.00 
Dishwasher, each\$3.00 
Disposal, each\$3.00 
Exhaust fans/attic fans, each\$3.00 
Electric range, each\$4.00 
Oven, each\$4.00 
Vent hood (residential), each\$3.00 
Vent hood (commercial), each\$15.00 
Low voltage permits (based on cost of job), 
0 up to $5,000.00 minimum fee\$40.00 
$5,000.00 and over min. fee plus $5.00 per\$1,000.00 
Sign lighting: 
Building, each sign\$10.00 
Freestanding, each sign\$25.00 
Parking lot lights, per pole\$5.00 
Items not listed will be charged at KW or HP rate. 
Minimum permit fee\$40.00 
Mechanical permit fee: 
Commercial, residential (additions and remodeling) and others 
Furnace 
0 — 150,000 BTU\$20.00 
151,000 — 300,000 BTU\$30.00 
301,000 — 1,000,000 BTU\$45.00 
1,001,000 and up\$70.00 
Air conditioning (compressor HP or tons) 
1 — 10 HP\$20.00 
11 — 30 HP\$25.00 
31 — 100 HP\$30.00 
101 HP and up\$35.00 
Heat pump (HP or tons) 
1 — 10 HP\$35.00 
11 — 30 HP\$50.00 
31 HP and up\$70.00 
Refrigeration 
1 — 10 HP\$20.00 
11 — 30 HP\$25.00 
31 — 100 HP\$30.00 
101 HP and up\$40.00 
Ventilating system (motor HP) 
0 — 10 HP\$25.00 
10.5 — HP and up\$35.00 
Other: 
Air handling unit\$20.00 
Gas piping (per appliance)\$4.00 
Exhaust fans\$3.00 
Hood (residential)\$3.00 
Hood (commercial)\$35.00 
Gas tank (commercial), per tank\$20.00 
Gas pump (commercial), per tank\$10.00 
Duct work/preexisting air conditioning and heating unit\$20.00 
Minimum permit fee\$40.00 
( Ord. of 3-19-2013(3) ; Ord. of 4-3-2018 ) 
Secs. 12-102—12-106. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-107. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
See section 12-101. 
Sec. 12-108. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-109. - Subdivision and land development regulations and construction specifications. 
See section 12-101. 
Sec. 12-110. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-111. - Utilities. 
The fees, taxes or charges required by chapter 111 are as follows: 
(1)  Water, sewer, and garbage. 
a.  Water meter — Water system capacity charges (does not include installation costs): 
Water Meter - Water Capacity Charge 
¾"\$1,200.00 
1"\$1,700.00 
2"\$5,700.00 
3"\$11,000.00 
4"\$16,000.00 
6"\$33,000.00 
8"\$50,000.00 
Note: Commercial water customers must comply with the City of Cumming's Cross Connection Control Ordinance and will be required to install and maintain a heated and enclosed RPZ Backflow Prevention Device at no cost to the City. All multi-unit residential developments must pay a water system capacity charge equivalent to the number of residential units × $1,200.00 per unit. Customers will pay a base bill for water, sewer and garbage for each residential or commercial unit. All commercial food service establishments must install and maintain a properly sized outdoor, in-ground, concrete, minimum 1,000-gallon grease interceptor. All customers must comply with the most-current city-mandated watering restrictions. 

 
b.  Sewer connection fees: (gallons per day per each individual residential unit: 250 gpd) 
Residential sewer capacity fees\$5,000.00 
Sanders Road and Samples Road PS's Special Sewer Capacity District charge\$6,250.00 
c.  Commercial sewer capacity fees: 
Based on average gallons per day (gpd) of water usage, per gpd\$20.00 
Sanders Road and Samples Road PS's Special Sewer Capacity District charge, per gpd\$25.00 
d.  Significant Industrial User (SIU) or hospital sewer capacity fee: 
Based on maximum day of water usage or max day flow permitted in discharge permit, per gpd\$20.00 
SIU Sanders Road and Samples Road PS's Special Sewer Capacity District charge, per gpd\$25.00 
e.  Garbage pickup fees: 
Residential (one pickup per week), per month\$15.00 
Commercial (one pickup per week), per month\$20.00 
Additional pickups, each\$15.00 
f.  Utility billing service charges: 
Late charge, per month\$5.00 
Reconnection fee and re-read fee\$40.00 
Returned check or insufficient funds fee\$25.00 
Water, sewer and garbage services will be terminated if an account is more than 60 days late. Services will be terminated if an account carries a balance of greater than $50.00 and is not paid by the due date. 
g.  Establishing service: $125.00 deposit required - Residential or commercial: 
Deposit of $125.00 per customer is refundable after service is terminated and the final bill is paid in full. All new customers must submit a picture ID along with DOB, a readable copy of a GA driver's license, a completed application for service along with either proof of ownership of the property such as a deed or a lease or rental agreement. If customer files for bankruptcy and the city is named in the bankruptcy, a new deposit of $125.00 will be required to re-establish service. The City of Cumming reserves the right to collect past due debt. 
h.  Stolen, damaged, or misplaced meter fine, including, but not limited to, damage to meter, register, antenna, backflow, meter box, lid, and curb-stop ..... $1,200.00 
i.  Meter or lock tampering fine (includes illegal removal of lock), including, but not limited to, tampering with lock, meter box, antenna, lid, curb-stop or other apparatus ..... $300.00 
j.  Move a ¾-inch residential water meter at customer request ..... $750.00 
Move a meter larger than ¾-inch at customer request, minimum plus cost of materials\$750.00 
k.  Test ¾-inch meter at customer's request ..... $100.00 
l.  Test 1-inch meter or larger meter at customer's request ..... $350.00 
m.  Hydrant meter rental fees: 
¾-inch fire hydrant meter requires a deposit of $250.00. A refund of $225.00 less a fee for water usage based on current rates will be made available once the meter is returned in good condition. Eight-inch fire hydrant meter requires a deposit of $1,000.00. A refund of $800.00 less a fee for water usage based on current rates will be made available once the meter is returned in good condition. 
n.  Utility code enforcement. 
Ordinance violations: $300.00 — $1,000.00 per day per offense 
Includes, but is not limited to, violations of the provisions of the city utilities ordinance or a city-issued industrial pretreatment permit. 
o.  Senior citizens (62 years and older) with picture ID: 
Senior citizens receive a 50-percent discount on water only (not on sewer) if they live inside the city limits. 
Senior citizens receive a 25-percent discount on water only (not on sewer) if they live outside the city limits. 
p.  Industrial surcharges: 

 
q.  Additional surcharges may be levied against industries whose effluent strength or concentration is such that an increased chemical, electrical, or oxygen demand is created by the discharge at the city's AWRF or other appurtenance. 
r.  Septic waste dump charges: All wastewater hauled and discharged into the city's AWRF will be charged a treatment surcharge rate of $0.15 per gallon. All charges must be paid prior to acceptance of the material by the City of Cumming. The city reserves the right to refuse to accept any and all hauled wastes. 
s.  Water laboratory testing fees: Coliform bacteria testing performed by the City of Cumming Potable Water Production Facility Laboratory - $35.00 per sample. 
(2)  Stormwater management services. 
a.  Stormwater management permit application review fee. 
b.  Stormwater management service fee for stormwater collection, distribution, and treatment of stormwater and other services. 
(Ord. of 10-26-2007, §§ 70-31—70-33, 70-35, 70-40, 70-42, 70-113—70-116, 70-125, 70-161, 70-344, 70-356) 
Sec. 12-112. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-113. - Zoning. 
See section 12-101. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, §§ 510, 1505; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 1; Ord. of 2-19-2008(01), art. II, §§ 9, 11, 20, 24; Ord. of 3-17-2009, § 2) 
Chapter 14 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At a specially called city council meeting on June 26, 1995, the mayor and council accepted a county proposal relating to the proportionate distribution of proceeds derived from the joint county and municipal one-percent sales and use tax authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Secs. 14-2—14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION AND PROFESSIONS TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; registration of nonresident contractors with state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-31. 

Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of processing and handling the occupation tax and accompanying returns. 
Business means any person who, within the corporate limits of the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in and/or represents himself to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly. Any person advertising by any means, including, but not limited to, signs, cards, circulars and newspapers, that he is engaged in a business of any kind shall be liable for the appropriate occupation tax required under this article and the payment of the appropriate fee therefor. No business required by this article to secure an occupation tax payment certificate shall be exempt from the payment of such occupation tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless at least 80 percent of the proceeds of such business are utilized for charitable purposes. 
Date of commencing operations means the date on which a business theretofore not engaged in commercial transactions within the city becomes engaged in business. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. The term "employee" includes an individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Number of employees of the business or practitioner, means as computed on a fulltime position basis or a fulltime position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a fulltime employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce fulltime position equivalents. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit organizations, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations that utilize 80 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), but does not include, a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees mean payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. The term "regulatory fee" may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1998, § 22-31; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-32)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 14-22. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes; nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1998, § 22-32; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-40)) 
Sec. 14-23. - Tax required for business dealings in the city. 
For each year, every person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous location in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location within the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the chief of police or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Code 1998, § 22-33; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-31)) 
Sec. 14-24. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the municipal judge, be punished as provided in section 1-11, in the discretion of the municipal judge; provided, however, that no criminal penalties contemplated by this section shall be imposed upon any person, partnership, corporation or other entity licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.), O.C.G.A. § 14-7-2(2) or O.C.G.A. § 14-10-2(2). 
(Code 1998, § 22-34; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-48)) 
Sec. 14-25. - Tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and the applicable out-of-state businesses with a location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as provided in section 12-14 and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city clerk's office. 
(c)  Restrictions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(3)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner, except as described in this section. 
(4)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the number of employees engaged in substantial efforts in the state. 
(Code 1998, § 22-35; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-34)) 
State Law reference— Determination of tax on basis of employees, O.C.C.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 14-26. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. title 3.3, ch. 8 (O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.). 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal, and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1998, § 22-36; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-50)) 
State Law reference— Specific exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16; limitation on levy of occupation tax on licensed businesses, trades and occupations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-18. 
Sec. 14-27. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee established in section 12-14 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of these accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee may be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Code 1998, § 22-37; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-33)) 
State Law reference— Administrative fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 14-28. - Paying tax of business with no location in state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state, if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property that generates income and is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state. 
(Code 1998, § 22-38; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-35)) 
State Law reference— Occupation tax on business with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 14-29. - Lines of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city's jurisdiction shall identify the line of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without having that line of business registered with the city clerk's office and that line of business being noted by the city clerk's office upon the business registration form, which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1998, § 22-39; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-36)) 
Sec. 14-30. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Code 1998, § 22-40; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-37)) 
Sec. 14-31. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
(a)  Prior to January 1 of each year, practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as the entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 14-25; or 
(2)  A fee in the amount established in section 12-14 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; however, a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  The per-practitioner fee provided for in this section applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(Code 1998, § 22-41; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-38)) 
State Law reference— Election of method of tax by professions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(g). 
Sec. 14-32. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state or instrumentalities of the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1998, § 22-42; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-39)) 
Sec. 14-33. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business. A penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of tax payable shall be imposed upon tax payments made after March 31 in the case of businesses in operation on January 1, and upon any tax payment for a new profession, trade or calling begun in the city if such tax payment is not made immediately upon beginning business. The tax registration provided in this article shall be issued by the city clerk; and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any of the kinds of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall be guilty of an offense; provided, however, that no criminal penalties contemplated by this section shall be imposed on any person, partnership, corporation or other entity licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq., O.C.G.A. § 14-7-2(2) or O.C.G.A. § 14-10-2(2). 
(b)  In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the police may proceed to collect the tax in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1998, § 22-43; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-41)) 
State Law reference— Due date and late payment date, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-20, 48-13-21. 
Sec. 14-34. - When registration due and payable; effect of transacting business when registration delinquent. 
(a)  Each registration required by this article shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all fees as provided for herein by March 31 of each year. Every person commencing business after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained registration shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 14-24. These penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties provided for in this article and may be collected by the remedies provided in this article for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. Any and all penalties provided for in this article may be pursued by the city, in addition to any penalties referenced in this section. 
(b)  The registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city clerk, and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 14-24. 
(Code 1998, § 22-44; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-47)) 
Sec. 14-35. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple operations inside and outside the city, the number of employees used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be only those employees who work in the city's jurisdiction. 
(b)  Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city information necessary to determine the number of employees who work in the city's jurisdiction. 
(Code 1998, § 22-45; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-42)) 
Sec. 14-36. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless it possesses a certificate or other recognition from the Internal Revenue Service of the United States recognizing it as a charitable entity. 
(Code 1998, § 22-46; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-43); Ord. of 5-1-2018, § 1 ) 
Sec. 14-37. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.), shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1998, § 22-47; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-44)) 
Sec. 14-38. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1998, § 22-48; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-45)) 
Sec. 14-39. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for the business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions or occupations without first having so obtained the registration shall be subject to penalties provided for in this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-49; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-46)) 
Sec. 14-40. - Police department subpoena and arrest powers. 
The police department and its duly designated officers and inspectors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-50; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-49)) 
Sec. 14-41. - Tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1998, § 22-51; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-51)) 
Sec. 14-42. - When tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the city clerk, on January 1 of each year and delinquent if not paid on or before March 31 of each year; however, the taxpayer may have the following option as to payment of such tax: If the entire amount of the occupation tax is paid on or before January 20, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a three percent discount of the amount of tax so paid, allowable at the time for such payment. No discount shall be allowed for any payment made after January 20. 
(Code 1998, § 22-52; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-52)) 
State Law reference— Due date and late payment date, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-20, 48-13-21. 
Sec. 14-43. - Payment of tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to the occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such fee shall be paid within 30 days from the date of commencing operations. 
(Code 1998, § 22-53; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-53)) 
State Law reference— Due date and late payment date, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-20, 48-13-1921. 
Sec. 14-44. - More than one line or place of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Code 1998, § 22-54; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-54)) 
Sec. 14-45. - Returns confidential. 
The applications and returns made to the city for an occupational tax payment certificate pursuant to this article shall be confidential and shall not be made public to the extent allowed or required by law. 
Sec. 14-46. - Businesses and practitioners required to provide certain information to city; inspections of books and records. 
(a)  All businesses and practitioners doing business within the city shall provide to the city clerk of the city: 
(1)  The address of any location or office maintained by such business or practitioner within the city; 
(2)  A description of the business or types of businesses conducted or occupation or profession performed at such location; and 
(3)  The payment of any business or occupation tax or regulatory fee to any other city or county. 
(b)  In any case, the city clerk, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The city clerk or his designated representatives shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the city clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 15 percent of the correctly assessed business fee plus 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount of any deficiency will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published in The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Code 1998, § 22-56; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-56)) 
Sec. 14-47. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspections of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to make any returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk's office in accordance with the provisions in section 14-46. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation taxes. 
(Code 1998, § 22-57; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-57)) 
Sec. 14-48. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for the business has been revoked, and who are required to make occupation tax returns and who fail to make such returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns, and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents or employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided for by this article. In the case of those practitioners where the city cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Code 1998, § 22-58; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-58)) 
Sec. 14-49. - Lien taken for delinquent tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk of the city, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for such tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership or corporation liable for such tax, all as provided for in the Charter and the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the chief of police of the city upon the property of the defendant located in the city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the Charter and ordinances of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1998, § 22-59; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-59)) 
Sec. 14-50. - Amendment, repeal of article. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the mayor and council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates or any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Code 1998, § 22-60; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-60)) 
Sec. 14-51. - Enforcement of article. 
It is the duty of the city clerk and police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and to summon all violators of this article to appear before the court. It is also the duty of the city clerk, chief of police, members of the police department and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 22-62; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-62)) 
Sec. 14-52. - Prohibition against unconstitutional application of penalties. 
No penalties, whether criminal or civil in nature or effect, shall be unconstitutionally applied to any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.), O.C.G.A. § 14-7-2(2), or O.C.G.A. § 14-10-2(2). 
(Code 1998, § 22-66; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-66)) 
Sec. 14-53. - Conflicts between specific provisions and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this article that the specific provision shall control. 
(Code 1998, § 22-67; Ord. of 12-16-1997, § I(22-67)) 
Sec. 14-54. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a)  Each business registration or occupation tax certificate granted pursuant to this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any current or future rule or regulation of this Code, or state or federal law. 
(b)  Notice; hearing. 
(1)  Whenever, in the city's discretion, there is cause to suspend or revoke a business registration as a result of subsection (a) of this section, a written notice of intention to suspend or revoke the business registration shall be furnished to the holder thereof. The business registration holder may submit a written request to the city administrator for a hearing within ten days after receipt of the written notice, wherein the business registration holder may present his or her case before the mayor and city council or such board as the mayor and city council may designate. If the business registration holder fails to timely submit a written request for a hearing, the city may suspend or revoke the business registration without further notice to the business registration holder on the eleventh day after notice. 
(2)  After any requested hearing, the mayor and city council or its designate may suspend or revoke this business registration if the grounds set forth in subsection (b)(3) of this section exist or in the mayor and city council's discretion if the establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare. 
(3)  The decision to suspend or revoke a certificate issued under this article shall be solely within the discretion of the mayor and city council or such board as the mayor and city council may designate. A business registration may be suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds, including, but not limited to: 
(A)  The business registration holder is guilty of fraud in the business or occupation he or she practices, or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
(B)  The business registration holder is engaged in his or her business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(C)  The business registration holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he or she is unable to perform his or her duties; 
(D)  The business registration holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(E)  The business registration holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 6, or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If after having been granted an occupation tax registration the applicant is found not to be of good moral character, or pleads guilty or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses listed in this section, said certificate shall be subject to suspension and revocation; 
(F)  The application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained herein; 
(G)  The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; or 
(H)  Any other violation of this Code, state, or federal law. 
(c)  All appeals of a decision of the mayor and city council issued under this section shall be made pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. within 30 days of the date of decision. 
( Ord. of 5-1-2018, § 2 ) 
Secs. 14-55—14-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTION BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 14-78. - Levied. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for each year an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate established in section 12-14. 
(Code 1998, § 22-103; Ord. of 12-22-1983, § 1) 
Secs. 14-79—14-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE LICENSE TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 14-100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Insurer means a company authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1998, § 22-136; Ord. of 10-18-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 14-101. - Insurers' license fees. 
There is levied for each year an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount established in section 12-14. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 14-102, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount established in section 12-14. 
(Code 1998, § 22-137; Ord. of 10-18-1994, § 1) 
State Law reference— Maximum tax, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Sec. 14-102. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, the insurer shall pay an additional license fee in the amount established in section 12-14. 
(Code 1998, § 22-138; Ord. of 10-18-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 14-103. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, not otherwise licensed. 
There is levied for each year an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 14-101 in the amount established in section 12-14. 
(Code 1998, § 22-139; Ord. of 10-18-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 14-104. - Gross direct premiums—On life insurers. 
There is levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to a percentage of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1 as established in section 12-14. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 14-101. 
(Code 1998, § 22-140; Ord. of 10-18-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 14-105. - Same—On all other insurers. 
There is levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to the percentage of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2 established in section 12-14. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 14-101. 
(Code 1998, § 22-141; Ord. of 10-18-1994, § 5) 
Sec. 14-106. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 14-101 and 14-102 shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1998, § 22-142; Ord. of 10-18-1994, § 6) 
Secs. 14-107—14-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL, MOTEL, AND LODGING TAX 

Sec. 14-127. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearing indicates a different meaning: 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. 
Monthly period means the calendar month in any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use and possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, other agreement, or otherwise. However, the term "occupant" shall not include state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business and who occupy rooms in any hotel for a period of one or more days. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel within the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such hotel, any lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for a least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation, limited liability company, cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof, upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided for in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credit, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed, as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-300)) 
Sec. 14-128. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Notwithstanding any penalties imposed pursuant to sections 14-135 and 14-136, any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required in this article, to furnish any return required to be made, who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-302)) 
Sec. 14-129. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk, when required by the city clerk, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy, and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-301)) 
Sec. 14-130. - Imposition of tax; date of tax. 
There is hereby levied and assessed and there shall be paid a tax on each occupancy in the amount established in section 12-14. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-303)) 
Sec. 14-131. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt of occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city, as provided in this article, and renting guestrooms in the city, and not exempted under section 14-133, shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant, and on demand from the occupant, give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owning on the amounts thereof. The city clerk shall have the power and authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing the methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-305)) 
Sec. 14-132. - Unlawful advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any portion thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that the tax will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, the tax or any portion thereof will be refunded. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-306)) 
Sec. 14-133. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Upon a corporation, association, or other legal entity organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational purposes, or for one or more such purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder, member, or individual; 
(2)  Upon the continuous occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel in the city in which occupancy has continued for a period of more than ten consecutive days; provided, however, that the tax authorized by this article shall apply to the occupancy of any guestroom during the first ten days of continuous occupancy; 
(3)  Upon the rental of any room in a hotel in the city provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such guestroom as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(4)  Upon facilities or to any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations which are provided without charge; 
(5)  Upon the rental of any room in a hotel in the city for use solely as a meeting room; or 
(6)  Upon the rental of any room furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-307)) 
Sec. 14-134. - Registration of operator; form and contents of registration; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or intending to engage within 60 days in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall register with the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk. Persons engaged in such business as an operator of a hotel in the city must register with the city clerk not later than 15 days after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived; provided, however, that failure to properly register with the city clerk shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the tax after the date of imposition thereof. 
(b)  Such registration form shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of this place of business, the official address for the operator to which notices required or allowed under this article shall be served, and such other information as the city clerk may require which shall facilitate the collection of the tax. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, or, in the case of an entity other than a natural person, by an authorized officer, manager, member, or other person authorized to bind the entity and act on such entity's behalf. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. In the event any information supplied to the city clerk on the registration shall become obsolete or shall not be accurate, it shall be the responsibility of the operator to ensure that the registration is updated to reflect the current and correct information. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue, without charge, a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from each occupant. Each certificate of authority shall be prominently displayed in the location of the business to which it is applicable so as to be seen and come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. The certificate of authority shall be nontransferable and nonassignable and shall be returned immediately to the city clerk upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-308)) 
Sec. 14-135. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return made by any person or the amount of the tax paid to the city by any person, the city clerk is authorized to compute and determine the amount of tax required to be paid upon the basis of any information known to the city clerk. One or more deficiency determinations may be made concerning the amount of tax due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest of deficiency. The amount of the deficiency determination, exclusive of penalties, shall be interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the tax as provided in this article to the date of actual payment of the amount due (plus interest and penalties, if any). 
(c)  Offsetting overpayments. In making a deficiency determination, the city clerk may offset overpayments for a prior monthly period against underpayments, penalties, and interest from another monthly period. The interest on underpayments shall accrue as provided for interest on deficiency determinations as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Penalty—Negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence on the part of any person or a disregard of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty equal to 15 percent of the amount of the deficiency shall be added to the total amount due for the deficiency. 
(e)  Same—Fraud or intent to evade tax. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the deficiency shall be added to the total amount due for the deficiency. 
(f)  Notice of city clerk's determination; service. The city clerk, or his designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of the deficiency determination, accrual of interest, and imposition of applicable penalties. The written notice shall be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the written notice is served by certified mail, return receipt requested, the notice shall be addressed as the operator's address appears on the last registration filed by the operator pursuant to section 14-134. In the case of service by written notice, service shall be deemed complete upon deposit of the certified mail in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time limit for notice of deficiency determination. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a return as required herein, every written notice of deficiency determination required by this article shall be served upon the operator as provided in subsection (f) of this section within three years following the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which such deficiency determination is made, or within three years following the date upon which the return is filed for the monthly period for which such deficiency determination is made, whichever shall last expire. There shall be no time limit for service of the written notice of deficiency determination for cases of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a return as required herein. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-310)) 
Sec. 14-136. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimation of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return as required herein, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the monthly period in which the person failed to make the required return and shall be based upon any information in the city clerk's possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city clerk shall compute and determine the amount of tax required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus computed a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more estimate determinations may be made for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Offsets. In making a estimate determination where no required return is made, the city clerk is authorized to offset overpayments made for any monthly period against the amount of tax due based on an estimate determination for the monthly period for which no return was made. 
(c)  Interest. The amount of the tax due based on the estimate determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, commencing on the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which no return was made and continuing to the date the amount of tax due, plus interest and penalties thereon, are actually paid. 
(d)  Penalties for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or authorized rules and regulations, a penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the tax due based on this estimate determination shall be added to the amount due for the monthly period for which no return was made. The penalty provided for in this subsection (d) shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the penalty provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Notice. Promptly after making the estimate determination, the city clerk shall notify the person failing to make the required return of the amount of tax due based on the estimate determination, plus the amount of accrued interest and penalties thereon. The notice shall be in writing and shall be served as provided in section 14-135(g). 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-311)) 
Sec. 14-137. - Failure to pay tax. 
In the event any person properly files a timely return with the city clerk as provided in this article, but fails to pay to the city clerk the amount of tax on the due date as provided in this article, the amount of tax shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date until the date the amount of tax, plus interest and penalties thereon, is paid. In addition, a penalty in the amount of 15 percent of the amount of the tax due shall be added to the amount due. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-312)) 
Sec. 14-138. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a return as required herein, at any time within three years after any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the delinquent amount together with interest and penalties as provided in this article, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other fees and costs incident thereto. There shall be no time limit for bringing an action as provided herein in cases of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a return as required herein. 
(b)  Duty of successors and assigns of operator to withhold tax. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells, transfers, assigns, releases, quit-claims, or conveys any business operation which is subject to the tax, the operator's successors and/or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount from the purchase price of the business operation to cover any amounts which may be due as tax until the operator produces a receipt from the city clerk stating that the tax due has been paid or until the operator produces a certificate from the city clerk stating that no tax is due. In the event the successors and/or assigns of the operator fail to withhold a sufficient amount from the purchase price of the business operation to cover any amounts which may be due as tax, the successors and/or assigns shall be liable for the amount of tax which is due. If any operator quits, closes, or stops operating the business which is subject to the tax for any reason, the successors, heirs, and/or assigns of the operator shall remain liable for any amounts which may be due as tax. 
(c)  Tax credit for interest paid or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or other person determines that there has been an overpayment or multiple payments, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such operator or other person shall have a period of three years from the date of payment to file a claim with the city clerk, in writing, stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall then be audited by the city clerk. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the operator or other person, or the city clerk is authorized to refund the amount to the operator or other person. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no operator or other person shall have any right to file a claim for overpayment in the event the alleged overpayment is a result of an estimated determination as provided for in section 14-136. 
(Ord. of 12-21-1999, § I(22-313)) 
Sec. 14-139. - Proceeds of tax. 
The proceeds of the tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 6-21-2005, § 11-314)) 
Secs. 14-140—14-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-162. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following items: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, electronically stored media or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (collectively hereinafter referred to as the "foregoing items"). A "substantial business activity" exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  The preponderance of the books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, electronically stored media or other visual representations for sale at the establishment are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(3)  At least 25 percent of the wholesale value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(4)  At least 25 percent of the retail value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of the foregoing items; or 
(5)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of the foregoing items; or 
(6)  The establishments devotes at least 25 percent of its interior business space or, if less than 25 percent, devotes at least 500 square feet of its interior business space to the display, sale, and/or rental of the foregoing items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in the term "interior business space"); or 
(7)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least 1,000 of the foregoing items and limits access to the premises or to the portion of the premises occupied by said items to adults only; or 
(8)  The establishment regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, using "adult," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
(9)  Maintains an adult arcade, which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means a nightclub, theater, or other establishment that features live performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, which such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, digital video discs, slides, electronic media or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Good moral character means having not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or not guilty or nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Sexual device means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or other and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore or adult video store, and adult entertainment establishment, an adult motion picture theater, or a sexual device shop. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia or pedophilia; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Code 1998, § 10-31; Ord. of 2-18-1997, §§ I-2, II-2; Ord. of 7-20-2010, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 14-163. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Secs. 14-164—14-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 14-195. - Purpose; intent; findings. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this division to regulate the place of operation of adult entertainment establishments. This division is intended to be a carefully tailored regulation to minimize the adverse land use impacts caused by the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments. The mayor and council find that restricting adult entertainment establishments to industrially zoned areas and imposing development standards can legitimately regulate adult entertainment establishments by establishing zones where adult entertainment establishments are most compatible with other uses or the surrounding neighborhood, and by requiring minimum distances to be maintained between adult entertainment establishment uses and other uses so as to afford the most protection to residential uses. It is not the intent or purpose of the mayor and council, in enacting this division, to deny to any person rights to speech, conduct or expression protected by the United States or state constitution. In the enactment of this division, the mayor and council intend to adopt a content-neutral measure to address the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments. 
(b)  Based on the experiences of other communities and municipalities, on studies, reports and findings of other communities, specifically, Indianapolis, Indiana; Austin, Texas; State of Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; and Roswell, Georgia, which are experiences and findings relevant to the problems that concern the city insofar as the growth of adult entertainment establishments, and after hearing expert testimony, it is noted that many types of criminal activity are frequently engendered by such businesses; and such businesses tend to create undesirable community conditions under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. Among the acts identified with such establishments are disorderly conduct, prostitution, drug trafficking and drug use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with such establishments are depression in property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of criminal behavior and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Specifically, the problems associated with increased prostitution, DUIs and other vice problems peak at the same times as other crimes that would require more resources for law enforcement. The types of operations that are used to curb prostitution and DUIs are labor-intensive and time-consuming with significant costs. The nearby neighborhoods suffer from increased noise levels during early morning hours and increased vandalism, including urination in doorways. Accordingly, the purpose of this division is to regulate certain types of business, including but not limited to adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, this division represents a balancing of competing interests; reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons thereof. 
(c)  The mayor and council find, based on a 1984 study entitled Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis, that areas with sexually oriented businesses had higher crime rates than similar areas with no sexually oriented business. Specifically, the mayor and council find that the study reveals that sex-related crimes, defined in the study as rape, indecent exposure, obscene conduct, child molestation, adult molestation, and commercial sex, are much more prevalent in areas where adult entertainment is offered than in areas where no adult entertainment is offered. The same finding is true as to the occurrence of major crimes. 
(d)  The mayor and council further find, based on a May 19, 1986, study from Austin, Texas, entitled Report on Adult Oriented Businesses in Austin, that severe decline in residential property values may be precipitated by the presence of an adult entertainment establishment, particularly where that adult entertainment establishment is located within one block of residential property uses. Furthermore, the mayor and council find that there is an indication that the introduction of adult entertainment establishments into areas of family-oriented, owner-occupied residential neighborhoods may precipitate a transition to a more transient, renter-occupied neighborhood. 
(e)  The mayor and council further find, based on an October 1980 study by the Minnesota Crime Prevention Center, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, entitled An Analysis of the Relationship Between Adult Entertainment Establishments, Crime and Housing Values, that adult businesses do have a significant and consistent positive correlation with the crime rate index and a negative correlation with the mean single-family housing value. The mayor and council also find, based on this study, that adult entertainment businesses should be permitted only in locations that are at least one-tenth mile, or approximately 500 feet, from residential areas and that adult entertainment businesses should not be placed adjacent to one another. 
(f)  The mayor and council further find, based on a June 1978 study from St. Paul, Minnesota, entitled Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul, that the presence of adult entertainment establishments correlates statistically with poor neighborhood condition. The mayor and council further find, based on this study, that the location of adult entertainment establishments correlates significantly with neighborhood deterioration. 
(g)  Moreover, it is the finding of the mayor and council that public nudity, either partial or total, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments leads to an increase in the surrounding area of criminal behavior and creates undesirable community conditions, blight and diminution in property values. 
(Code 1998, § 10-51; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-1) 
Sec. 14-196. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-11. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this division shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued under this division. 
(Code 1998, § 10-52; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-20) 
Sec. 14-197. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this division is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this division, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoyment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this division. In addition, violation of the provisions of this division shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted under this division. 
(Code 1998, § 10-53; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-21) 
Sec. 14-198. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this division. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city administrator showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, ages and social security numbers of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with, as a dancer, a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this division. 
(e)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open on Sundays or Christmas Day. 
(f)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any distilled spirits, malt beverage, wine or controlled substances on the premises of the licensee. For the purpose of this subsection, the terms "distilled spirits," "malt beverage," and "wine" shall be defined as those terms are defined in chapter 4 of this Code. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "controlled substances" shall be defined as that term is defined in the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, codified at O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq. 
(g)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses, notices and permits required by this division. 
(h)  All dancing or performing at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose that is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(i)  No dancing or performing at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(j)  No dancer or performer at an adult entertainment establishment shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or performer at an adult entertainment establishment. 
(k)  No patron shall directly pay, tip or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer at an adult entertainment establishment. 
(l)  No dancer or performer at an adult entertainment establishment shall solicit any pay, tip or gratuity from any patron. 
(m)  All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed under this division shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present, which means illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Code 1998, § 10-54; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-3) 
Sec. 14-199. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd or obscene fashion. 
(Code 1998, § 10-55; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-4; Ord. of 11-15-2005(02), § 2) 
Sec. 14-200. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1998, § 10-56; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-6) 
Sec. 14-201. - Location. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land zoned or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, government building, day care facility, library, civic center, public park, or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this division is located. 
(4)  Within 100 yards of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than one acre of land containing at least 150 feet of road frontage. 
(6)  In any district other than one that is zoned for and meets all requirements of M-1 zoning district. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight-line distance, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e., as the crow flies. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary. 
(Code 1998, § 10-57; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-7) 
Sec. 14-202. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises licensed under this division for a period of five years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or not guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on the licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city administrator or his designated representative of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city administrator or his designated representative and shall receive approval of such employment from the city administrator or his designated representative. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city administrator or his designated representative requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of denial, apply to the city administrator or his designated representative for a hearing. The decision of the city administrator or his designated representative after hearing may be appealed to the mayor and council. A nonrefundable investigation fee in the amount established in section 12-14 shall accompany the notice of intended employment. 
(c)  Independent contractors. For the purposes of this division, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1998, § 10-58; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-8(a), (b), (d)) 
Sec. 14-203. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee in the amount established in section 12-14 has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator or his designated representative and the planning and zoning department. Such approval shall not be granted, unless all of the requirements and regulations as contained in this division have been fully complied with. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this division. 
(Code 1998, § 10-59; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-17) 
Sec. 14-204. - Appeal procedure. 
The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified on an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city administrator. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and council, and the name and address of the applicant. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular mayor and council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for mayor and council action. 
(Code 1998, § 10-60; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-18) 
Sec. 14-205. - Mayor and council hearing. 
Whenever an appeal has been scheduled before the mayor and council, pursuant to section 14-204, at the time and date set therefore, the mayor and council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and council may sustain, overrule or modify the action for which complaint is made. The action of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(Code 1998, § 10-61; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-19) 
Sec. 14-206. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least one time per day and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement; and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough and complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Code 1998, § 10-62; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-22) 
Sec. 14-207. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least one time per month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city administrator or his designated representative. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 10-63; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-23) 
Sec. 14-208. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city administrator or his designated representative on his finding of a violation of this division resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city administrator or his designated representative shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city administrator or his designated representative may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city administrator or his designated representative. The city administrator or his designated representative shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Code 1998, § 10-64; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-24) 
Sec. 14-209. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Code 1998, § 10-65; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-25) 
Secs. 14-210—14-226. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 14-227. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal of a valid license within the time required under this division, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 1998, § 10-86; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-5) 
Sec. 14-228. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city administrator or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee in the amount established in section 12-14 shall be paid to the city administrator or his designated representative to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. The city administrator or his designated representative shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The filing of an application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  An application for license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment must be filed for each such establishment to be licensed, regardless of other licenses obtained by the person under this article for other adult entertainment establishments. 
(Code 1998, § 10-87; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-9) 
Sec. 14-229. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full, true and legal name of the applicant and any other names or aliases presently or formerly used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application, and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth, if applicable. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation, company or partnership, and, if a corporation, company, partnership or other entity, all shareholders, members or partners holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding or five percent ownership interest. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names, ages, dates of birth and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and the name, age, date of birth and address of each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of superior court. If the applicant is a limited liability partnership, it shall furnish a copy of the election filed with the clerk of superior court. If the applicant is a limited liability company, it shall furnish the names, ages, dates of birth and addresses of all members. If any shareholder, partner or member is a corporation, partnership or limited liability company, the provisions pertaining to those entities shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this division, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of a crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(14)  The individual applicant's fingerprints. 
(15)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
(16)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city administrator or his designated representative shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(17)  Address of premises to be licensed. 
(18)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right. 
(19)  A current plat (prepared within three months of the date the adult entertainment establishment license is submitted) by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site, or other business regulated under this division. 
(20)  Verification and acknowledgement under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
b.  If a partnership, by the managing or general partner. 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. 
d.  If a limited liability company, by the managing member of the company. 
e.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 1998, § 10-88; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-10) 
Sec. 14-230. - Application investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city administrator may grant the license if he finds: 
(1)  The required application fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this division. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, limited partnership or limited liability partnership; or any of the members, if the applicant is a limited liability company; or any of the participants, if the applicant is some other organization, venture or firm, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense that, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city, county or state located within or without this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  The applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager, has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this division to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for such specified sexual activities openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  The proposed premises is not to be located nearer to any church, school, library, government building or site or any other business restricted under this division than permitted elsewhere in this chapter. 
(12)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or regulation of the city, the state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Code 1998, § 10-89; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-11) 
Sec. 14-231. - Suspension, revocation of license of employee. 
Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(Code 1998, § 10-90; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-8(c)) 
Sec. 14-232. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
No license provided for by this division shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership, company or association, any of whose officers, partners or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(Code 1998, § 10-91; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-12) 
Sec. 14-233. - Refusal. 
(a)  If the city administrator or his designated representative, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this division, he shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by regular and certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial to the mayor and council pursuant to section 14-204. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 81 (1976). 
(Code 1998, § 10-92; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-13) 
Sec. 14-234. - Fee. 
The initial license fee, due and payable upon the granting of a license pursuant to this division, is in the amount established in section 12-14. The initial license fee must be paid prior to any adult entertainment establishment's commencement of business. There shall be no prorating of license fees, and the license fee for any partial calendar year shall be the same as the fee for the full calendar year. 
(Code 1998, § 10-93; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-14) 
Sec. 14-235. - Renewal. 
(a)  Licenses for adult entertainment establishments must be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this division. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be in the amount established in section 12-14. 
(b)  The annual license renewal fee shall be paid to the city administrator or his designated representative no later than December 10 of the year preceding the year for which the renewal is to be effective. 
(Code 1998, § 10-94; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-15) 
Sec. 14-236. - Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license; and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of the license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1998, § 10-95; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § I-16) 
Secs. 14-237—14-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 14-266. - Purpose; intent; findings. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this division to regulate the place of operation of adult bookstores. This division is intended to be a carefully tailored regulation to minimize the adverse land use impacts caused by the undesirable secondary effects of adult bookstores. The mayor and council find that restricting adult bookstores to industrially zoned areas and imposing development standards can legitimately regulate adult bookstores by establishing zones where adult bookstores are most compatible with other uses or the surrounding neighborhood, and by requiring minimum distances to be maintained between adult bookstore uses and other uses so as to afford the most protection to residential uses. It is not the intent or purpose of the mayor and council, in enacting this division, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States or state constitution, nor is it the intent to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books or other materials. Further, the mayor and council do not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States or state constitution, nor do they intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such constitutionally protected materials. Finally, in the enactment of this division, the mayor and council intend to adopt a content-neutral measure to address the secondary effects of adult bookstores. 
(b)  The mayor and council find, based upon an October 1980 study by the Minnesota Crime Prevention Center, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, entitled An Analysis of the Relationship Between Adult Entertainment Establishments, Crime and Housing Values, that adult bookstores are significantly related to diminishing market values of neighboring residential areas, that adult bookstores should not be located in residential areas, and that adult bookstores should be permitted only in locations that are at least one-tenth mile, or approximately 500 feet, from residential areas. 
(c)  The mayor and council further find, based upon a June 1978 study by the Division of Planning of the St. Paul, Minnesota, Department of Planning and Economic Development and the Community Crime Prevention Project of the Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board entitled Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul, that the presence of adult bookstores correlates with a decreasing market value of neighborhood residential areas. The mayor and council also find that adult bookstores tend to locate in areas of poorer residential condition, and that more than two adult entertainment businesses in an immediate area is associated with a statistically significant decrease in residential property market value, and that such a concentration of adult entertainment businesses in a given area should be discouraged. The mayor and council also find that such worsening of residential conditions will adversely affect uses found in residential areas or in the proximity of residential areas, such as public residential areas or in the proximity of residential areas, such as public recreational facilities, public or private institutional uses, churches, schools, universities, colleges, trade schools, libraries and day care centers. 
(d)  The mayor and council further find, based upon a May 19, 1986, land use study conducted in Austin, Texas, that an adult bookstore within one block of a residential area decreases the market value of homes, that adult bookstores are considered a sign of decline by lenders, making underwriters hesitant to approve 90—95 percent financing many homebuyers require, and that patrons of adult bookstores tend to be from outside the immediate neighborhood in which the adult bookstore is located. 
(e)  The mayor and council further find, based upon a March 3, 1986, study conducted by Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, Community Development Department entitled Adult Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City—A Survey of Real Estate Appraisers, that an adult bookstore will have a negative effect on residential property market values if it is located closer than one block to residential uses. 
(f)  The mayor and council further find, based upon a 1983 study conducted in Indianapolis, Indiana, that real estate appraisers there overwhelmingly (80 percent) felt that an adult bookstore located in a neighborhood would have a negative impact on residential property values within one block of the site. Furthermore, a 1984 study entitled Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis found that areas with sexually oriented businesses had higher crime rates than similar areas with no sexually oriented businesses. 
(Code 1998, § 10-116; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § II-1) 
Sec. 14-267. - Location requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements upon adult entertainment establishments set out supra , no sexually oriented business shall be located: 
(1)  In any district other than one that is zoned for and meets all requirements of M-1 zoning; 
(2)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, day care center, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; or 
(4)  Within 1,500 feet from the property line of any other sexually oriented business. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, distance shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight-line distance, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, (i.e., "as the crow flies"). The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary. 
(Code 1998, § 10-117; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § II-3; Ord. of 7-20-2010, § 4) 
Sec. 14-268. - Signs. 
No depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be visible from outside the structure of a sexually oriented business or on signage outside the structure. 
(Code 1998, § 10-118; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § II-4; Ord. of 7-20-2010, § 5) 
Sec. 14-269. - Violation; penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1998, § 10-119; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § II-5) 
Sec. 14-270. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any sexually oriented business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this division is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this division, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such sexually oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a sexually oriented business contrary to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1998, § 10-120; Ord. of 2-18-1997, § II-6; Ord. of 7-20-2010, § 6) 
Sec. 14-271. - Alcohol sales at sexually oriented businesses. 
No sexually oriented business shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any distilled spirits, malt beverage, wine or controlled substances on the premises of the licensee. For the purpose of this subsection, the terms "distilled spirits," "malt beverage," and "wine" shall be defined as those terms are defined in the Alcohol Ordinance of the City of Cumming, Georgia, and all amendments thereto. For the purpose of this section, the term "controlled substances" shall be defined as that term is defined in the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, codified at O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq. 
(Ord. of 7-20-2010, § 7) 
Secs. 14-272—14-288. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BONA FIDE AMUSEMENT GAMES 

Sec. 14-289. - Applicability and limitations. 
(a)  This article governs the possession and provision to the public of coin-operated bona fide amusement games as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d), to wit, a coin-operated game or device designed and manufactured only for bona fide amusement purposes which involves some skill in its operation, if it rewards the player exclusively with: 
(1)  Free replays. 
(2)  Merchandise limited to noncash merchandise, prizes, toys, gift certificates or novelties, each of which has a wholesale value of not more than $5.00 received for a single play of the game or device. 
(3)  Points, tokens, vouchers, tickets, or other evidence of winnings which may be exchanged for rewards set out in subsection (a)(1) of this section or subsection (a)(2) of this section, or a combination of rewards set out in subsection (a)(1) of this section and subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Any combination of rewards set out in two or more of subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section. 
Not included in this definition of the term "coin-operated bona fide amusement games" are games or devices classified by the United States government as requiring a federal gaming stamp under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code or any item described as a gambling device in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2)(B)—(2)(D), which are prohibited within the city, irrespective of any contrary indication in this article. 
(b)  Under no circumstance shall more than five coin-operated bona fide amusement games be operated in a single establishment. For the purpose of this article, an establishment refers to the location for which the applicable business license, as provided in section 14-291, was issued. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 14-290. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 14-291. - Qualifications for license, renewal of license, transferability of license. 
(a)  Prior to making a coin-operated bona fide amusement game available to the public, the person, partnership, corporation, or other entity possessing such game shall apply for and obtain a coin-operated bona fide amusement game license from the city, for each such coin-operated bona fide amusement game to be made available to said public. 
(1)  Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity wishing to make a coin-operated bona fide amusement game available to the public as provided for in this article shall complete and submit the appropriate application for each such game. The application shall be available from the department of planning and zoning of the city during normal business hours. 
(2)  Licensing and application fees. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a license for the possession and operation of a coin-operated bona fide amusement game, as provided for in this article, the applicant under this subsection shall remit to the city: 
1.  A yearly license fee in the amount established in section 12-14. 
2.  An application fee in the amount established in section 12-14. 
b.  The purpose of the license fee and the application fee is to reimburse the city for the expenses associated with processing the application for a license as well as inspecting and regulating the operation of coin-operated bona fide amusement games, as delineated in this article. In the event that a coin-operated bona fide amusement game license is denied, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant; however, the application fee shall not be refunded. 
c.  Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity wishing to possess and operate a coin-operated bona fide amusement game as provided for in this article shall first be the holder of a current and valid business license issued by the city. 
(b)  Any coin-operated bona fide amusement game license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. All such licenses are renewable upon application for renewal and the payment of the yearly license fee provided for in subsection (a) of this section; however, the prior issuance of a coin-operated bona fide amusement game license shall not be construed to create any right to a renewal of such license. 
(1)  Renewal applications are due on or before November 15 of each calendar year, and if said applications are not submitted by that deadline, the applicant must pay a late penalty in the amount of ten percent of the total license fee otherwise due under this article. 
(2)  In the event that a renewal application has been submitted and the application fee paid, but the renewed license has not been received by the applicant by January 1 of the new calendar year, the applicant may continue to operate its previously licensed coin-operated bona fide amusement games under its old license until such time as the renewal license is received, or a notification is received from the city that the license will not be renewed. 
(3)  In the event that a renewal application is not filed until after December 31 of a calendar year, the applicant shall not be eligible for license renewal, but instead shall complete and file a new application for a coin-operated bona fide amusement game license, and shall pay the appropriate fee. Additionally, whenever the applicant falls within the purview of this subsection, the applicant shall not be permitted to continue to operate any coin-operated bona fide amusement game under an older license, but instead, must cease the operation of all such games until the new license application is processed and a decision made thereon. 
(c)  No license issued for a coin-operated bona fide amusement game under this article shall be transferable to a different coin-operated bona fide amusement game. In the event that a coin-operated bona fide amusement game must be replaced, a new coin-operated bona fide amusement game license must be sought in accord with this article. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 3) 
Sec. 14-292. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city shall conduct a yearly inspection of all coin-operated bona fide amusement games licensed by this article, such inspection to assess the following: 
(1)  Whether the coin-operated bona fide amusement game is licensed by the city. 
(2)  Whether the coin-operated bona fide amusement game is in proper working order. 
(3)  Whether the coin-operated bona fide amusement game has been tampered with by any person, for whatever purpose. 
(4)  Whether the coin-operated bona fide amusement game falls within the definition of those games permitted under O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d). 
(5)  Whether the license holder is providing prizes in connection with the use of the coin-operated bona fide amusement game in compliance with the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d). 
(b)  The operation of a coin-operated bona fide amusement game without the appropriate license provided for in this article shall be considered a misdemeanor. For the purposes of this subsection, each game operated for which a valid license has not been obtained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2005, § 4) 
Secs. 14-293—14-317. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Cable television franchise agreements for the city are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— State cable franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq.; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

Sec. 14-318. - Franchise fee established. 
The city hereby establishes a franchise fee in the amount established in section 12-14 for any cable or video state franchise issued by the state, which franchise fully or partially includes territory within the city's corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2008, § 1(26-1)) 
State Law reference— Local franchise fees, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-6. 
Sec. 14-319. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes the city administrator or his designee, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia and to each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant for or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2008, § 1(26-2)) 
Secs. 14-320—14-341. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAWNSHOPS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

Sec. 14-342. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acceptable qualifications means the following requirements, which a person must meet: 
(1)  No felony convictions under any federal, state, or local law, excluding traffic convictions; 
(2)  No convictions under any federal, state, or local law involving any controlled substances (drugs); and 
(3)  No convictions under any federal, state, or local law concerning theft or other property crimes in the past five years. 
Conviction includes any adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, a bond forfeiture, or any plea under the O.C.G.A. title 42, ch. 8, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.) 
Employee means any person working for a pawnbroker in any capacity, who in the performance of his duties comes into contact with a member of the public or is employed by a pawnbroker on a parttime or a fulltime basis, either with or without remuneration by a pawnbroker. 
Identification means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and such person's date of birth. Such documents include but are not limited to a passport, a driver's license, a military identification card, a verified work identification card, or a state department of public safety identification card. Citations or any identification without a photograph are not acceptable under this section. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt redeemable upon certain terms and with the express or implied power of sale upon default. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. 
(Code 1998, § 22-177; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § II) 
Sec. 14-343. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 14-344. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city the business of a pawnbroker without complying with the business tax registration requirements as set forth in article II of this chapter. In addition, any person who wishes to operate the business of a pawnbroker, must file an application, which shall require information including but not limited to the: 
(1)  Person's full name; 
(2)  Current address; 
(3)  Social security number; 
(4)  Date of birth; 
(5)  Place of birth; 
(6)  Current telephone number; 
(7)  Aliases; 
(8)  Type and number of identification; 
(9)  All addresses for the past five years; 
(10)  Employment history for the past five years; 
(11)  Proof of age; 
(12)  Complete information regarding the conviction of any crime within the past five years; and 
(13)  The name, address, social security number and date of birth of all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the person filing the application. 
In addition, all applicants must pay a nonrefundable application fee as established by the city administrator and set forth in section 12-14. 
(b)  Investigation of applicant. 
(1)  The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the occupation tax certificate shall be granted at the next regular meeting of the mayor and council unless the chief of police or his designated representative finds that: 
a.  The applicant, whether it be individual, association, partnership, or corporation, does not meet the acceptable qualifications; 
b.  The required application fee has not been paid; 
c.  The application fails in any respect to conform to all provisions of this article; 
d.  The applicant has not fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
e.  The applicant has purposely, knowingly or in bad faith made a misrepresentation on the application; 
f.  Prior to the date of the application, the applicant has had a license or permit denied, suspended or revoked in the city or any other local government jurisdiction located in this state or any other state; 
g.  The approval of the license would violate this article or any other ordinance, regulation or law of the city, the state or the United States; or 
h.  The applicant for the pawnbroker license was not verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, the manager or general partner; 
3.  If the applicant is a corporation, by the president of the corporation; or 
4.  If the applicant is any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(2)  The failure to disqualify any application for one of the conditions stated in subsection (a) of this section does not waive any right of the city to invalidate, suspend or revoke the license in the future. 
(3)  If an application for a license to operate as a pawnbroker is denied, the applicant shall be notified within five business days of such denial that the application has been denied. Upon receipt of notice of the denial, the applicant may appeal the denial to the municipal court judge by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of notice of denial of the application. Appeals from the ruling of the municipal court judge may be made to the mayor and council by filing notice with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the decision by the municipal court judge. Any decision upon which written notice of appeal has not been filed with the city clerk within the prescribed period of time shall be final. 
(c)  Transferability. No pawn license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee or by operation of law to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and the license will be thereafter null and void; except, however, that if the license is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire by purchase or otherwise the interest of the deceased partner without effectuating a surrender or termination of such license and in such case the license upon notification to the city shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(d)  Suspension and revocation of existing licenses. 
(1)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license previously granted. If the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke a license, he shall give written notification to the licensee of the action; and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation. Such notification shall also contain a notice of hearing before the chief of police, containing the time and place of the hearing, and shall be served upon the licensee no later than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license if one or more of the following occurs: 
a.  A licensee no longer meets the acceptable qualifications because of the occurrence of some event subsequent to the approval of the application for the license; 
b.  A licensee has failed to pay any fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or under any other ordinance of the city; 
c.  A licensee purposely, knowingly or in bad faith gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
d.  A licensee has violated any provision of this article; 
e.  A licensee has purposely or knowingly allowed the possession, use, sale or transfer of controlled substances on the premises; 
f.  A licensee has purposely or knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance, regulation or law of the city, the state or the United States to occur on the premises; and/or 
g.  A licensee has allowed a person to become or remain employed by the licensee in violation of section 14-345. 
(3)  If the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any license under this article, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the sole discretion of the chief of police. However, the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d)(4) of this section. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations or violations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented. 
(4)  In the event of a suspension or revocation of an existing license by the chief of police, the licensee may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the municipal court judge by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the date of decision by the chief of police. Appeals from the municipal court judge's ruling may be made to the mayor and council by filing notice with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the decision by the municipal court judge. Any decision upon which written notice of appeal has not been filed with the city clerk within the prescribed period of time shall be final. 
(5)  Suspension or revocation of a pawnbroker's license for any reason stated in subsection (d)(2) of this section in no way waives the city's right to pursue other legal action against the licensee. 
(Code 1998, § 22-178; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § III) 
Sec. 14-345. - Pawnbroker's employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of pawnbrokers shall not be less than 18 years of age and must meet the acceptable qualifications. 
(b)  Conditional employment. Any person who wishes to become an employee of a licensed pawnbroker may do so conditionally upon filing an application for a work permit as a pawnbroker's employee with the police department on the applicable forms, which shall require information including but not limited to the applicant's: 
(1)  Full name; 
(2)  Current address; 
(3)  Social security number; 
(4)  Date of birth; 
(5)  Place of birth; 
(6)  Current telephone number; 
(7)  Aliases; 
(8)  Driver's license number or state identification number; 
(9)  All addresses for the past five years; 
(10)  Employment history for the past five years; 
(11)  Proof of age (certified copy of birth certificate); 
(12)  Complete information regarding the conviction of any crime within the past five years; and 
must pay a nonrefundable investigative fee to the police department as stated in section 12-14. 
(c)  Investigation of application for work permit. The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application for the work permit. Such conditional employee shall be given a permit to be employed by a pawnbroker if the application is approved. If an application for permit is denied, the conditional employee and the pawnbroker must be notified within five business days that the application has been denied; and the applicant must then immediately be relieved from employment or the pawnbroker's license will be subject to suspension or revocation as outlined in section 14-344(d). The applicant may appeal the denial of an application for a work permit as a pawnbroker's employee to the municipal court judge by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the receipt of the notification that the applicant's application for permit was denied. Appeals from the ruling of the municipal court judge may be made to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the ruling of the municipal court judge. Any decision upon which written notice of appeal has not been filed with the city clerk within the prescribed period of time shall be final. 
(d)  Posting of permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this section must be posted in the place of business of the pawnbroker in a permanent manner in a place that is easily visible. The permit remains the property of the city. 
(e)  Revocation of permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be suspended or revoked in a manner similar to the suspension or revocation of a pawnbroker's license as outlined in section 14-344(d). 
(Code 1998, § 22-179; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § IV) 
Sec. 14-346. - Permanent records required; content. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase, sale or other pawn transaction: 
(1)  The date of the transaction; 
(2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; 
(3)  The name, age and address of the customer; a description of the general appearance of the customer, including but not limited to height, weight, hair color, sex, race and nationality; and the distinctive number from the customer's identification; 
(4)  An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, to the fullest extent possible: 
a.  The name of the manufacturer; 
b.  All identifying marks; 
c.  The serial number; 
d.  The model number; 
e.  Other numbers of identification, including numbers engraved by the owner; and 
f.  A statement of the kind of material of which the goods are made; 
(5)  The number on the receipt or pawn ticket; 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; 
(7)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan, if payment is made by check; 
(8)  The specific maturity date of the transaction; and 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  The entries in the permanent record book described in subsection (a) of this section shall appear in ink and shall be in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a single line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. 
(c)  The permanent record book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer who is certified under the state peace officer standards and training council or who is a federal officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(d)  The permanent record book may not be removed from the pawnbroker's premises for any reason not expressly approved in writing by the chief of police. 
(e)  The permanent record of each pawn or purchase transaction provided for under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
(Code 1998, § 22-180; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § V) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-132—44-12-134. 
Sec. 14-347. - General operating procedures. 
(a)  All persons who are issued a license to operate as a pawnbroker shall accept the license on the implied agreement and condition that their place of business shall be subject to visitation and inspection by law enforcement officers as provided under section 14-346(c) at any time during the normal business hours or a specified reasonable time. 
(b)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check the identification of the person initiating a transaction other than the sale of an article by the pawnbroker to a customer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or any pawnbroker's employee to receive from a minor goods of any character or description. 
(d)  No pawnbroker or any pawnbroker's employee shall accept any goods or articles that have had the serial number altered, obliterated or removed, or any goods or articles that at the time of production are issued serial numbers if those serial numbers are missing. 
(Code 1998, § 22-181; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § VI) 
Sec. 14-348. - Prohibited acts. 
Any pawnbroker or any employee, clerk or agent of such pawnbroker who shall do any of the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Fail to make an entry of any material matter in his permanent record book; 
(2)  Make any false entry in his permanent record book or computer records; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from his place of business such permanent record book or computer records; 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer who is certified by the state peace officer standards and training council or who is a federal officer to inspect his permanent record book, computer records or any goods in his possession during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
(5)  Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for at least four years; 
(6)  Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person who the pawnbroker knows, believes or should have reason to believe is under the age of 18 years or who the pawnbroker knows, believes or has reason to believe is not the true owner of such property; 
(7)  Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or seller or waiving any of the provisions of this section or providing for a maturity date less than one month after the date of the pawn transactions; or 
(8)  Fail to return or replace pledged goods to a pledgor or seller upon payment of the full amount due the pawnbroker unless the pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or law enforcement officer or agency. 
(Code 1998, § 22-182; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § VII) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-137. 
Sec. 14-349. - Prohibited storage of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker engaged in the pawning of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, boats or any other type of motor vehicle to use the premises for the open storage of such vehicles. Such vehicles shall be contained in fenced areas not readily visible to the public and in a zoning district approved that allows outside storage. 
(Code 1998, § 22-183; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § VIII) 
Sec. 14-350. - Articles subject to a criminal investigation. 
If a law enforcement agency has probable cause to believe that an item acquired by a pawnbroker in the course of business is the subject of a criminal investigation, such agency may place a hold that would prohibit the release of such goods until adequate investigation can verify the validity of ownership. Upon the release of such property, the pawnbroker shall keep a record of the disposition thereof just as he normally would other goods or items transferred out of his possession pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1998, § 22-184; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § IX) 
Sec. 14-351. - Stolen items. 
Every person licensed under this article shall, immediately upon request, turn over to the appropriate law enforcement agency every item believed by such agency to be a stolen item. The law enforcement agency shall furnish a property receipt, including a case number or recovery, to the pawnbroker surrendering such item. The item shall be returned to the pawnbroker only upon the determination that the item is not stolen or that it is not reasonably possible to determine that the item is or is not stolen. The transaction between the pawnbroker and law enforcement agencies shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-5-50. 
(Code 1998, § 22-185; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § X) 
Sec. 14-352. - Restrictions on advertising; disclosure tickets; statements. 
(a)  Any pawnbroker shall include most prominently in any and all types of advertisements the term "pawn" or "pawn transaction." A pawnbroker shall not use the term "loan" in any advertisements or in connection with any advertising of the business of the pawnbroker; however, the provisions of this sentence shall not apply to a pawnbroker in business as of March 1, 1992, which uses the term "loan" in connection with the name of the business or with advertising of the business. 
(b)  On any sign advertising a pawnbroker's business, the words on such sign shall be at least 24-inch-high letters. On any other sign on the property where the pawnbroker's business is located that advertises any other activities or businesses engaged in by the person who is the pawnbroker, the words on such sign shall be in 12-inch-high letters or smaller. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to signs of pawnbrokers which signs are in existence on March 1, 1992. 
(c)  Every pawnbroker in every pawn transaction shall present the pledgor or seller with a written disclosure ticket or statement in at least nine-point typeface, appropriately completed, with no other written or pictorial matter except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, containing all the following information: 
(1)  Information identifying the pawnbroker by name and address. 
(2)  A statement as follows: 
"This is a pawn transaction. Failure to make your payments as described in this document can result in the loss of the pawned item. The pawnbroker can sell or keep the item if you have not made all payments by the specified maturity date." 
(3)  If the pawned item is a motor vehicle or motor vehicle certificate of title, a statement as follows: 
"Failure to make your payment as described in this document can result in the loss of your motor vehicle. The pawnbroker can also charge you certain fees if he actually repossesses the motor vehicle." 
(4)  A statement that the length of the pawn transaction is 30 days and that it can only be renewed with the agreement of both parties and only for 30-day incremental periods. 
(5)  The annual percentage rate, computed in accordance with the federal Truth in Lending Act and regulations under such act, for the first 30 days of the transaction, computed as if all interest and pawnshop charges were considered to be interest. 
(6)  The annual percentage rate, computed in accordance with the federal Truth in Lending Act and regulations under such act, for each 30-day period in which the pawn transaction might be continued or extended, computed as if all interest and pawn charges were considered to be interest. For purposes of identifying the annual percentage rate after the second continuation or extension, a single statement that identifies an annual percentage rate for each possible 30-day period thereafter shall meet the requirements of this section. 
(7)  A statement in dollar amounts of how much it will cost the seller or pledgor to redeem the merchandise in any 30-day period of the transaction. 
(8)  A statement in dollar amounts of how much it will cost the seller or pledgor to redeem the merchandise in any 30-day period after the first 30-day period of the pawn transaction, provided that all fees and charges have been kept current. 
(9)  A statement of the specific maturity date of the pawn transaction. 
(10)  A statement of how long, the grace period, the pledged goods may be redeemed after the maturity date and the dollar amount that will be required to redeem the pledged goods after the specific maturity date. 
(11)  A statement that after the grace period the pledged goods become the property of the pawnbroker. 
(12)  If the pawn transaction involves a motor vehicle or motor vehicle certificate of title, a statement that the pawnbroker: 
a.  May not charge a storage fee for the motor vehicle unless the pawnbroker repossesses the motor vehicle pursuant to default; 
b.  May charge a storage fee for a repossessed motor vehicle not to exceed $50.00 per day, but only if the pawnbroker actually repossesses and actually must store the vehicle; 
c.  May charge a repossession fee, not to exceed an amount stated in the schedule of fees and charges, but only if the pawnbroker actually repossesses the motor vehicle; 
d.  May charge a fee to register a lien upon the motor vehicle certificate of title, not to exceed any fee actually charged by the appropriate state to register a lien upon a motor vehicle certificate of title, but only if the pawnbroker actually places such a lien upon the motor vehicle certificate of title. 
(13)  A statement that any costs to ship the pledged items to the pledgor or seller can be charged to the pledgor or seller, along with a handling fee to equal no more than 50 percent of the actual costs to ship the pledged item. 
(14)  A statement that a fee of up to $2.00 can be charged for each lost or destroyed pawn ticket. 
(d)  In addition to the information required by subsection (c) of this section, the pawnbroker may, but is not required to, include the following information on the same disclosure ticket or statement, provided that such information is not used to obscure or obfuscate the information required by subsection (c) of this section: 
(1)  Information identifying the pledgor or seller. 
(2)  Any logo the pawnbroker may desire to use. 
(3)  Any numbers or characters necessary for the pawnbroker to identify the merchandise or goods associated with the pawn transaction. 
(4)  Any other information required to be disclosed to consumers by any other law, rule or regulation of the United States or the state. 
(5)  Information identifying or describing the pledged item. 
(6)  Information that is only for the internal business use of the pawnbroker. 
(7)  The hours of operation of the pawnbroker. 
(8)  The time of day of the pawn transaction. 
(9)  Any agreement between the pledgor or seller and the pawnbroker which does not controvert the provisions of this article or of the Fair Business Practices Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.). 
(e)  The pawnbroker shall have the pledgor or seller sign the disclosure statement and shall furnish a completed copy to the pledgor or seller. The pawnbroker shall maintain a completed and signed copy of the disclosure statement on file for two years subsequent to the maturity date of the pawn transaction. Failure to maintain such a copy shall be conclusive proof that the pawnbroker did not furnish such a statement to the pledgor or seller. 
(Code 1998, § 22-186; Ord. of 7-19-1994, § XI) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-138. 
Secs. 14-353—14-377. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - YARD AND GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 14-378. - Purpose. 
For the explicit purpose of maintaining the street sides of the city in a clean and orderly manner not only for those of us who live here but for those who visit the city, the yard sale permit and fine process given in this article shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 22-221; Res. of 6-24-1994) 
Sec. 14-379. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 14-380. - Permits required; issuance. 
(a)  Any citizen desiring to hold a yard sale or garage sale in the city shall be required to obtain a permit. 
(b)  A permit will be issued by the city by calling the planning and zoning department or the police department at least 24 hours in advance, for a period not to exceed four consecutive days. 
(Code 1998, § 22-222; Res. of 6-21-1994) 
Sec. 14-381. - Failure to remove debris. 
The failure of a permittee to remove debris from site after sale will cause a fee as set forth in section 12-14 to be assessed to the person holding the permit. 
(Code 1998, § 22-224; Res. of 6-24-1994) 
Sec. 14-382. - Sales items picked up by city. 
Sales items left at a yard or garage sale site and by necessity picked up by the city's street department will be charged out per truckload in an amount set forth in section 12-14. 
(Code 1998, § 22-225; Res. of 6-24-1994) 
Secs. 14-383—14-407. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-408. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearing indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the city administrator, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab or limousine business in the city. 
Certificate holder means a person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued. 
Doing business in the city means picking up passengers in the incorporated limits of the city and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed as "doing business in the city" if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates taxicabs or limousines on such person's own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers. 
Driver means any person who drives or operates a taxicab or limousine on the streets of city on the basis of contract for a licensed taxicab or limousine company for the purpose of transporting passengers, merchandise, property, or vehicles. 
Driver's permit means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a taxicab or limousine within the city. 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for a luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than ten passengers and with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle, and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit; further, no vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and a limousine. 
Permit holder means a person to whom a driver's permit has been issued. 
Stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which has been designated by the city as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs or limousines. 
Street means and includes any street, alley, lane, avenue, court, or public place in the city. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying less than 15 passengers for hire, or offering to carry passengers for hire, except motor vehicles used as ambulances, sight-seeing cars or buses, and except for limousines and buses operating on a fixed route. 
Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-314)) 
Sec. 14-409. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 14-410. - Compliance. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating a taxicab or limousine in the city without first meeting the requirements of this article. With regard to limousines, this article is intended to regulate only those limousine businesses and limousine drivers doing business within the city limits not already regulated under O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.1. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-315)) 
Sec. 14-411. - Certificate holders responsible for violations by drivers. 
Certificate holders under this chapter are responsible for violation of this chapter by their vehicle operators whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-316)) 
Sec. 14-412. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall have the duty of hearing appeals from decisions denying, revoking or suspending a certificate or permit. 
(b)  No certificate or permit shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. 
(c)  The city administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant, certificate or permit holder of a decision to deny, suspend or revoke the certificate or permit. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant, certificate or permit holder of the right to appeal under the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Decisions of the mayor and council, city administrator or his designated representative that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant, certificate holder or permit holder under this article may be appealed to the mayor and council. A written notice of appeal shall be submitted to the city administrator within 15 calendar days after notification of the adverse decision. Such notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and council, and the name and address of the appellant. 
(e)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of the filing of the written appeal, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the city administrator, or unless the hearing is rescheduled by city administrator. 
(f)  The appellant shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the hearing at least seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(g)  The appellant at said hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. The mayor and council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the appellant, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and council may sustain, overrule or modify the action for which complaint is made. 
(h)  The findings of the mayor and council shall be forwarded to the city administrator after conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city administrator to notify the appellant of the actions of the mayor and council. 
(i)  The findings of the mayor and council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the finding by petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county as provided by law. 
(j)  For the purposes of this section, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served, or when delivery to the last known address of the affected party is acknowledged by signed receipt of certified mail, or three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-317); Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 14-413. - Occupation tax. 
Each person licensed under the provisions of this article, with a location within the city, shall be subject to an occupation tax as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-318)) 
Sec. 14-414. - Regulatory fee. 
Each company and individual licensed under the provisions of this article to conduct a taxicab or limousine, or operate a taxicab or limousine within the city shall be subject to a regulatory fee as provided in this article and authorized by article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-319)) 
Sec. 14-415. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provision of this article shall be punished as provided in sections 1-11. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-320)) 
Sec. 14-416. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of the administrative provisions of this article shall be conducted by the city administrator or his designees. Enforcement action for violation of the operating regulations of this chapter may be taken by any law enforcement officer of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-321)) 
Sec. 14-417. - Indemnity for benefit of city. 
Any taxicab or limousine operating under this article shall hold the city harmless against any and all liability, loss, costs, damages, or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of the negligence, default, or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any taxicab or limousine, its servants, agents, drivers, or other employees, during the operation by the company of a taxicab or limousine, either in respect to injuries to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-322)) 
Secs. 14-418—14-447. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATES AND PERMITS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 14-448. - Due process. 
Any person who believes that he has been denied due process of law under this article in the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit shall be entitled to a hearing. Unless such hearing is requested within five working days after the alleged denial of due process, such person shall be presumed to have accepted summary process. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-371)) 
Sec. 14-449. - Grants. 
The grant or denial of a certificate or permit under this chapter shall be based on a consideration of the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience. The grant of such certificates or permits may be suspended or revoked, based on the same considerations. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-370)) 
Sec. 14-450. - Criminal history record check. 
The city administrator's office or his designees shall conduct an investigation into the criminal history of each certificate or permit applicant. In addition to the criminal history consent referenced above, the applicant, upon request from the city administrator shall provide criminal history information from the state, any other state, or any political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-337)) 
Secs. 14-451—14-468. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 

Sec. 14-469. - Certificate of public convenience and necessity required. 
No person shall do business or permit a taxicab or limousine owned or controlled by such person to do business in the city without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city administrator. In the event that a limousine business or limousine driver doing business within the city limits is regulated under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 5, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.1 et seq.) and has been issued a certificate of public convenience and necessity by the state public service commission, proof of such issuance shall be presented to the city administrator prior to conducting business within the city. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-323)) 
Sec. 14-470. - Certificate application. 
An application for a certificate shall be filed with the city administrator upon forms provided by the city and shall be verified under oath. Each applicant is required to submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation including a criminal history check. If the applicant is other than the sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a ten percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. The application shall be made in the owner's name. An applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Have not been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, been on probation, parole or been imprisoned within a period of five years previous to the date of the application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the United States, the state, or any other state, or of any political subdivisions thereof: child molestation; contributing to the delinquency of a minor; child endangerment; child abuse; prostitution; pandering; sodomy; aggravated sodomy; rape; statutory rape; sexual battery; aggravated sexual battery; Peeping Tom; possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; any felony; criminal solicitation to commit any of the above-listed offenses; attempts to commit any of the above-listed offenses. 
(4)  File application for the initial licensing and inspections of vehicles along with a list of all drivers who will be scheduled for driver permitting and indicate whether drivers are company employees or independent contractors. An insurance binder must be provided for each vehicle which will be used, whether the vehicle belongs to the company or to independent contract drivers. 
(5)  Submit with the application payment of the proper regulatory fees in the amount established in section 12-14 for each vehicle to be operating in the city and the proper occupation tax as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(6)  Provide the following information: 
a.  Business. Trade name of business; legal name of business; business address; business telephone number; federal employee ID number or social security number; mailing address; type of ownership; parties having any interest in the business; the amount, terms, and payee of any capitalization loans; the company color scheme and insignia to be used on its vehicles; detailed business plan; details of insurance coverage, amounts and types of coverage; the number of vehicles to be used at the start of business and the number of vehicles expected to be in service at the end of one year of operation. 
b.  Applicant. Full name; aliases; race; sex; nationality; social security number; alien registration number if applicable; home address; length of residency; home phone number; birthplace; date of birth; occupation and employer; driver's license number; education; height; weight; hair color; eye color; other physical characteristics; spouses name, race, date of birth, sex, nationality, social security number, home address, home phone number, employer and business address; previous employment history; previous addresses; previous arrests including offense, location, date, and disposition; financial statement; the existence of any prior applications; the existence of any previous revocations or suspension of any taxicab or limousine license or certificate; the existence of an interest in any other taxicab or limousine operations; the existence of any unpaid judgments against the applicant; the amount of experience in the transportation of passengers. 
c.  Manager. Full name; home address; date of birth; race; sex; social security number. 
(7)  Submit any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity requires the granting of a certificate. 
(8)  Certify that he has read this chapter; and if the certificate is granted, each certificate holder shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and shall require each of his employees to be familiar with this chapter. 
(9)  Provide such further information as the city administrator shall require. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denying a certificate and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-324)) 
Sec. 14-471. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application and after the city administrator determines the certificate application satisfies all the qualifications outlined in this chapter, the city administrator shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon by the mayor and council. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons holding certificates at the time of the application being filed. Due notice shall also be given to the general public by advertising a notice of such hearing in the Forsyth County News newspaper once a week for two weeks. Any interested person may file with the city administrator a memorandum in support or in opposition to the issuance of a certificate. 
(b)  A decision by the mayor and council shall be made within 30 days from the date of the mayor and council meeting and notice of that decision shall be mailed to the applicant. If the application is denied, such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal; such appeal to be in accordance with section 14-412. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-325)) 
Sec. 14-472. - Issuance of certificate. 
(a)  If the mayor and council finds further taxicab or limousine service in the city is required by public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this article and any rules promulgated by the city, then the city administrator shall issue a certificate in the owner named in the application, stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under such certificate and the date of issuance, otherwise the application shall be denied. 
(b)  In making the above findings, the mayor and council shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs or limousines already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions and the character, experience and responsibility of the applicant. 
(c)  The following formula shall be used in determining whether additional taxicabs and limousines are required for public convenience and necessity: 
(1)  The total number of vehicles authorized under certificates issued shall not be greater than one vehicle per 1,000 residents of the county, including all incorporated and unincorporated areas. Such population shall be based upon the most current census information available from the U.S. Census Bureau. 
(2)  The number of vehicles authorized by a certificate shall be the actual number of vehicles being operated by a certificate holder. The certificate holder shall notify the city administrator of any additions or deletions to its fleet of vehicles. Upon notification of changes, the city administrator shall adjust the authorized number of vehicles on the respective certificates accordingly. Vehicles not being used due to temporary maintenance shall be considered as being operated for this purpose. 
(3)  This section is intended to establish a minimum number of authorized vehicles, and should not be construed to limit the authority of the mayor and council to deny any application for a certificate if they determine that the public convenience and necessity does not warrant the issuance of such certificate. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-326)) 
Sec. 14-473. - Liability insurance required. 
(a)  No taxicab certificate shall be issued or continued in effect, unless there is in full force and effect liability insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $25,000.00 bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of $50,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident; $25,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and $5,000.00 personal injury protection pursuant to the no fault insurance laws of the state. Such liability insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately cause by the negligence of a holder, his servants, or agents. Written documentation of above-stated insurance coverage, signed by an authorized agent of the insurer shall be filed in the office of the city administrator. Such insurance shall be carried with some reputable company with an agency and place of business in the state and subject to the approval of the city administrator. 
(b)  No limousine certificate shall be issued or continued in effect unless there is in full force and effect liability insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $100,000.00 bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of $300,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident; $50,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and $5,000.00 personal injury protection pursuant to the no fault insurance laws of the state. Such liability insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately cause by the negligence of a holder, his servants, or agents. Written documentation of above-stated insurance coverage, signed by an authorized agent of the insurer shall be filed in the office of the city administrator. Such insurance shall be carried with some reputable company with an agency and place of business in the state and subject to the approval of the city administrator. 
(c)  Each certificate holder shall provide to the city administrator by the 15th day of the months of March, June, and September proof that all vehicles used by the company are in compliance with the insurance requirements of this article. 
(d)  Before any policy of insurance required by this article is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given immediately, in writing, to the city administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-327)) 
Sec. 14-474. - Certificate fees. 
(a)  No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder has paid an annual regulatory fee, as provided in section 14-470(5), and occupation tax as provided in article II of chapter 14, for the right to engage in the taxicab or limousine. Such fees shall be for the calendar year and shall be in addition to any other license fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable to such holder or the vehicle or vehicles under his operation and control. 
(b)  In the event the certificate is denied or the application is withdrawn prior to issuance, the amount of the regulatory fee shall be refunded with the exception of the amount of $100.00 which will be retained by the city to cover administrative and investigative costs. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-328); Ord. of 6-17-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 14-475. - Renewal of certificates. 
(a)  All certificates shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reinstated by the city administrator for the following year, upon renewal application being made and a determination by the city administrator that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in this article, and upon payment of the appropriate fees. 
(b)  Certificates may be renewed only between November 15 and December 31 of each year for the following year. Certificates not renewed by December 31 shall be void and such certificate holder must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a certificate. 
(c)  Limousine businesses and/or limousine drivers doing business within the city limits that are regulated under O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.1 and have been issued a certificate of public convenience and necessity by the state public service commission and have already presented proof of such issuance to the city administrator, must present a valid certificate issued by the state public service commission each year by December 31, if such business is to be continued the following year. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-330)) 
Sec. 14-476. - Alteration of certificates. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-331)) 
Sec. 14-477. - City administrator; authority to increase or decrease authorized vehicles. 
The city administrator shall have the authority to increase or decrease the number of vehicles authorized pursuant to a certificate, within the limits as set forth in this article as the total number of taxicabs and limousines allowed for all certificate holders. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-332)) 
Sec. 14-478. - Suspension or revocation of certificate. 
(a)  A certificate may be suspended or revoked by the city administrator for the following reasons: 
(1)  Furnishing fraudulent or untruthful information or omitting information requested in any application or report. 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a certificate. 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse. 
(5)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(6)  Commission of any act which would disqualify a person from obtaining a certificate. 
(7)  Discontinuing operations for a period of more than 30 days, or failing to begin operations within 60 days of the date of issuance of a certificate. 
(b)  Prior to any suspension or revocation by the city administrator, the certificate holder shall be given written notification of the action, which shall include the grounds for such action and notice of the certificate holder's right to appeal; such appeal to be in accordance with section 14-412. 
(c)  In the event that the state public service commission revokes or suspends a certificate issued to a limousine business or limousine driver under O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.7, such businesses and/or drivers operating within the city limits shall report such revocation or suspension to the city administrator within 48 hours of receiving notice of such revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-329)) 
Secs. 14-479—14-509. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Drivers' Permits 

Sec. 14-510. - Requirements and restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall operate a taxicab or limousine for the purpose of doing business within the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab or limousine shall permit it to be so driven unless the driver of such taxicab or limousine shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab or limousine operator's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No certificate holder shall employ any driver who has not first met the requirements of this chapter and been issued a permit. 
(c)  No application for a driver's permit will be processed unless the certificate holder affirms in writing that he intends to hire the applicant if the permit is approved. 
(d)  Limousine drivers doing business within the city limits that are regulated under O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85 and have been issued a permit to drive a limousine (a limousine chauffer permit) as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.10, must present proof of such issuance to the city administrator prior to doing business within the city. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-333)) 
Sec. 14-511. - Application. 
(a)  Each applicant shall: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Be a resident of the state for at least three months immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  Have not been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, been on probation, parole or been imprisoned within a period of five years previous to the date of the application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the United States, the State of Georgia, of any other state, or of any political subdivisions thereof: child molestation; contributing to the delinquency of a minor, child endangerment; child abuse; prostitution; pandering; sodomy; aggravated sodomy; rape; statutory rape; sexual battery; aggravated sexual battery; Peeping Tom; possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; reckless driving; fleeing or attempting to elude police; any felony; criminal solicitation to commit any of the above-listed offenses; attempts to commit any of the above-listed offenses. 
(5)  Exhibit a proficiency in the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(6)  Submit an application for a taxicab or limousine operator's permit with the city administrator on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be verified by the notarized signature of the applicant and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name. 
b.  Age. 
c.  Race. 
d.  Sex. 
e.  Date of birth. 
f.  Social security number. 
g.  Place of birth. 
h.  Nationality. 
i.  Alien identification number if applicant is not a U.S. citizen. 
j.  Residence address and phone number. 
k.  Name and address of company holding certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
l.  The notarized signature of the certificate holder verifying that he intends to hire the applicant. 
m.  Experience and/or training of applicant in transporting passengers or property for hire. 
n.  A complete disclosure of all arrests for criminal and traffic violations, including the date, charge, location, and disposition of each offenses. 
o.  Employment history. 
p.  Such other relevant information as shall be required by the city administrator. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A certificate from a licensed physician certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any communicable diseases or other disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe driver. 
(2)  A valid Georgia driver's license. 
(3)  One fingerprint card prepared by a member of a Georgia law enforcement agency. 
(4)  A driver's history from the Georgia Department of Public Safety which contains the applicant's driving record for the previous seven years. 
(5)  Fees as follows: 
a.  Background investigation fee. A background investigation fee in the amount established in section 12-14 shall be paid by the applicant in accordance with this article. 
b.  Driver's permit fee. A driver's permit fee in the amount established in section 12-14 shall be paid by the applicant upon issuance of the permit. 
(6)  Criminal history consent form. 
(7)  Certification that he has read and understands this chapter. 
(8)  Two current two-inch by two-inch (approximately) full-face photographs of the applicant. One photograph shall be attached permanently to the driver's permit for display in the vehicle which the applicant is to drive, and the second photograph shall be filed for record with the city administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-334)) 
Sec. 14-512. - Drivers; health. 
(a)  All persons driving taxicabs or limousines in the city shall be in good health and be capable of safely performing the work as a taxicab or limousine driver. 
(b)  Should the city administrator have concerns about the capability of any driver to safely operate taxicab or limousine, he may require that such driver, at the driver's own expense, undergo a physical examination by a licensed physician. Refusal of the driver to undergo the examination shall constitute grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-335)) 
Sec. 14-513. - Consideration of permit application; denial or approval. 
(a)  The city administrator shall upon consideration of the application and all related reports and certifications either deny or approve the taxicab or limousine operator's permit. 
(b)  The following shall be grounds for denial of the permit: 
(1)  Failure to qualify under the criteria set forth in this article. 
(2)  Failure to furnish all information required by this article. Failure to disclose such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denying a certificate and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of this state. 
(3)  A driver's history which contains more than five moving traffic violations in the past five years, or violation of traffic offenses totaling more than 20 points as designated by the department of public safety. 
(c)  In the event that the permit is approved, the city administrator shall issue said permit to the applicant, through the certificate holder. 
(1)  The permit is valid for the calendar year in which issued and shall expire on December 31 of each year, unless renewed. 
(2)  The permit is nontransferable and is valid only for the driver while employed by the certificate holder named in the application and on the permit. 
(3)  The permit shall bear the name, company name and address, race, age, and photograph of the applicant. 
(4)  Every driver granted a permit under this article shall post his driver's permit on display in the taxicab or limousine to be operated by the holder of the permit in a display case or holder designed for that purpose on the dashboard facing the passenger compartment, in clear view of the passengers at all times when the taxicab or limousine is for hire. 
(5)  A notice provided by the city administrator shall be on display on the front dashboard facing the passenger compartment. The notice shall contain sufficient information to allow the customer to contact the city administrator or his designees concerning compliments or complaints about the taxicab or limousine or its operator. 
(d)  In the event the permit is denied, the city administrator shall notify the applicant in writing with the specific grounds for the denial and notice of the applicant's right to appeal; such appeal to be in accordance with section 14-412. 
(e)  The fees provided for a driver's permit are nonrefundable. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-336)) 
Sec. 14-514. - Suspension or revocation of a driver's permit. 
(a)  A permit may be suspended or revoked by the city administrator for the following reasons: 
(1)  Furnishing fraudulent or untruthful information or omitting information requested in any application or report. 
(2)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a permit. Failure to disclose such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denying a certificate and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of this state. 
(3)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(4)  Commission of any act which would disqualify a person from obtaining a permit. 
(5)  Violation of any traffic law while operating a taxicab or limousine. 
(b)  In the event that a permit is suspended or revoked, the city administrator shall notify the applicant in writing with the specific grounds for the suspension or revocation and notice of the applicant's right to appeal; such appeal to be in accordance with section 14-412. 
(c)  In the event that the state public service commission revokes or suspends a permit as prescribed under O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.7 (chauffeur's permit), such driver operating within the city limits shall report such revocation or suspension to the city administrator within 48 hours of receiving notice of such revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-338)) 
Sec. 14-515. - Driving after suspension or revocation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or limousine for the purpose of carriage of passengers or property during any period in which such permit is suspended or revoked in accordance with provisions of this article or if applicable, O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.7. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-339)) 
Sec. 14-516. - Renewal of permits. 
(a)  All permits shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reinstated by the city administrator for the following year, upon renewal application being made and a determination by the city administrator that the applicant remains qualified as set forth in this chapter, and upon payment of the appropriate fees. 
(1)  Each applicant for renewal must submit along with his renewal application a certificate from a licensed physician certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any communicable diseases or other disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe driver. 
(2)  Each applicant for renewal must submit a driver's history from the state department of public safety covering the previous calendar year. 
(b)  Permits may be renewed only between November 15 and December 31 of each year for the following year. Permits not renewed by December 31 shall be void and such driver must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a permit. 
(c)  Drivers operating within the city limits that have been issued permits under O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.9 and have already presented proof of such permits to the city administrator, must present a valid permit issued by the state public service commission each year by December 31, if said business is to be continued the following year. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-340)) 
Sec. 14-517. - Alteration of permits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully to alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy a driver's permit or notice to passengers issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-341)) 
Sec. 14-518. - Permit not assignable. 
(a)  Every person to whom a permit has been issued shall return same to the city administrator's office upon discontinuing operation of a taxicab or limousine for the certificate holder named on the permit. Such permit shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person or be valid for any other certificate holder. Permit holders who change employment shall apply to the city administrator's office for an updated permit which reflects the proper certificate holder for which the permittee will be employed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permit holder to allow his permit to be used by any other person. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-342)) 
Secs. 14-519—14-544. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-545. - Vehicle age. 
No vehicle shall be used as a taxicab or limousine that exceeds the age of ten years from the date of manufacture or the date the vehicle was purchased new if this date can be shown. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-343)) 
Sec. 14-546. - Vehicle condition. 
(a)  Drivers and certificate holders are responsible for maintaining each taxicab or limousine in a clean and mechanically sound and safe condition. Each vehicle shall meet the requirements outlined under inspection requirements of this section. 
(b)  All taxicabs and limousines subject to this chapter shall be inspected, at a minimum, twice annually and approved by the city administrator's office. Each vehicle shall be inspected prior to being placed into service. Once a vehicle meets the requirements of the inspection, a sticker will be affixed to the left side of the windshield. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, top lights, turn signals, license plate lights, windshield wipers and washers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires, and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of vehicle. 
a.  Tires shall not be regrooved and shall have at least three lines of noticeable groove, not less than 3/16 -inch deep. 
b.  Exhaust system must be complete and enable the vehicle to run quietly. 
c.  Paint shall not be faded; waxing and washing shall be done at reasonable intervals; distinctive markings are colors applied pursuant to this chapter must be clearly legible. 
d.  Bumpers shall be tightly secured. 
e.  Grill shall be whole. 
f.  All hubcaps shall be in place, unless the wheels are of an ornamental design clearly intended to be used without hubcaps. 
(2)  Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating system to ensure that each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment (if the vehicle is a taxicab or limousine) shall be inspected to ensure that there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors, and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger baggage (if the vehicle is a taxicab or limousine). 
(3)  Each vehicle shall be equipped with safety restraints for each passenger the vehicle is designed to carry. 
(4)  Each vehicle shall have a spare tire and jack. 
(5)  All taxicabs and limousines shall be equipped with two-way radios. 
(6)  Taximeters must be positioned so that they are visible from the passenger compartment. 
(7)  Each vehicle shall be marked as required by this article. 
(8)  Each vehicle shall have a current Georgia license plate. 
(9)  Each taxicab and limousine shall have a minimum of three doors designed for passenger entry and exit. 
(c)  The inspection sticker, when affixed, is proof that the vehicle met the licensing and insurance requirements at the time of the last inspection. Each vehicle must have in it proof of current insurance coverage as outlined in this article. 
(d)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time by the city administrator or his designees. The city administrator, upon notification or observations of violations of this section or any other section of this chapter which deals with the physical condition of taxicabs or limousines, shall place a deadline decal on the windshield of the vehicle, said decal to list all violations. No driver or other unauthorized person shall remove or deface a deadline decal. No driver shall use a vehicle to transport passengers for hire while a deadline decal is in place. The city administrator will remove the deadline decal after correction of all listed violations. Vehicles found to be substandard after the deadline decal date shall be subject to removal of the inspection sticker by the city administrator's office. 
(e)  No certificate holder or driver shall use any vehicle which has not been inspected and has the city inspection sticker affixed. 
(f)  Inspection stickers are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle. 
(g)  The city administrator's office must be notified within ten days of any vehicle being taken out of service for any reason other than temporary maintenance. Temporary maintenance is maintenance which will be completed within a 30-day period. 
(h)  One of the inspections as required herein shall be conducted during the months of December or January at which time the inspection sticker will be affixed and will remain in effect through the calendar year for which the inspection is performed unless removed for violations of this article. At this inspection, there must be produced a certification from a qualified mechanic that the brake, exhaust, steering, suspension systems, and taximeter (if applicable) of the vehicle are in proper working order. 
(i)  Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris and at all time suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-344)) 
Sec. 14-547. - Identification of vehicles; display required. 
(a)  Each taxicab subject to the provisions of this article shall display, in colors contrasting with the color of the vehicle, on each side and the rear of the vehicle, the correct name or trade name and telephone number of the certificate holder and a number to distinguish it from others operated in the city, such numbers to be prescribed by the city administrator. Markings displaying the name of the business shall be in minimum of two-inch letters and a maximum of ten-inch letters. Other lettering shall be a minimum of 1½-inch letters and a maximum of six-inch letters. There shall be no outside advertising of any kind on taxicabs or limousines. 
(b)  Every taxicab operated on the streets of the city shall display, as a part of its equipment, an identification insignia on the top, which shall be electrically lit at night, and which top light shall carry either the name of the company operating the taxicab, or the term "taxi" or "taxicab," or "cab;" provided, however, that during the period in which a taxicab is occupied and under hire by a passenger, the identification insignia on the top of the vehicle shall not be lit. 
(c)  Each taxicab or limousine may also bear an identifying design, monogram or insignia, or color scheme approved by the city administrator. No design shall be approved which, in the opinion of the city administrator, conflicts with or imitates any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by another certificate holder; or is designed in such a manner as to be misleading or deceptive to the public. 
(d)  Limousines are excepted from having markings, top lights, two-way radios or taximeters; however, limousines are required to have a plate attached to their front or rear bumper indicating the company business name. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-345)) 
Sec. 14-548. - Taximeters. 
(a)  Any taxicab operated under the authority of this article may be equipped with a taximeter. If a taximeter is used, it shall be fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times day and night, and after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. All taximeters shall be installed, properly connected and repaired as prescribed by the manufacturer of such meter. 
(b)  Each taximeter shall have thereon a signal to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to activate the signal of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. Any taximeter shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city administrator or his designees, and upon discovery of any violation or any inaccuracy, the city administrator shall notify the operator of said taxicab to cease operation immediately, which action shall be taken. The taxicab shall be kept out of service until the taximeter is repaired, the required working condition is restored, and the taximeter is resealed. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-346)) 
Secs. 14-549—14-574. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATING RULES 

Sec. 14-575. - Compliance with laws and ordinances; safety. 
The driver of any vehicle provided for in this article shall operate such vehicle in accordance with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. He shall exercise due regard for the safety, comfort, and convenience of their passengers and the general public. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-369)) 
Sec. 14-576. - Operating regulations: rates of fare. 
(a)  No person shall operate a taxicab or limousine within the city without first filing with the city administrator a copy of such certificate holder's rate schedule; and any changes must also be filed with the city administrator prior to such changes being made. This section shall also apply to limousine businesses and limousine drivers regulated under O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.1. 
(b)  No operator of a taxicab or limousine shall charge a rate in excess of the rates filed with the city administrator. This section shall also apply to limousine businesses and limousine drivers regulated under O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.1. 
(c)  Each taxicab operating within the city shall have a rate card setting forth its rates for mileage, waiting time, extra passengers, and excess baggage. Such rate card shall be printed in standard block letters showing the taxicab company name not less than three-quarters inch in height, and the rates not less than three-eighths inch in height. The rate card shall be displayed within the vehicle in such place as to be conspicuous and in view of all passengers, subject to the approval of the city administrator. 
(d)  Each taxicab shall have painted or affixed by decal on the exterior of the left and right rear doors its schedule of meter rates and the statement "CARD PROVIDED ON REQUEST," or equivalent wording as approved by the city administrator, in standard block letters not less than one inch in height. Such letters shall be in a color which contrasts with the vehicle color, subject to approval of the city administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-347)) 
Sec. 14-577. - Failure, refusal to pay charges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any vehicle licensed under this article after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab or limousine with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-348)) 
Sec. 14-578. - Call jumping. 
(a)  Certificate holders nor drivers shall practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another company. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver, owner, or operator to use a radio frequency scanner or to be in possession of such in a taxicab or in company headquarters; and no such scanner shall be in possession of any taxicab driver, owner or operator at any other location where such scanner is intended to be used to monitor the radio transmissions of other taxicab companies. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-349)) 
Sec. 14-579. - Transport of goods; alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab or limousine within the city to use such vehicle for the delivery of any alcoholic beverages or for the driver of any taxicab or limousine to use the vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers or of merchandise which is the subject of lawful sale in the city. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-351)) 
Sec. 14-580. - Occupancy. 
(a)  No taxicab or limousine operating within the city shall carry more passengers than that recommended by the manufacturer of the vehicle or for which there are individual seating arrangements. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver to carry more than one passenger in the front seat of any taxicab. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab or limousine to pick up a second passenger or to permit any other person to occupy or ride in the vehicle when the same is occupied by a fare-paying passenger or by members of the party of the fare-paying passenger, without the consent of such fare-paying passenger. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-352)) 
Sec. 14-581. - Driver appearance. 
All taxicab and limousine drivers shall be neat in appearance while on duty, clean in person and dress. No person shall operate a taxicab or limousine without shoes and each driver must wear a collared shirt, blouse, or top and ankle length pants or a skirt. Shorts may be worn during summer months. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-353)) 
Sec. 14-582. - Refusal to transport orderly passengers. 
(a)  No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly persons upon request unless such taxicab is previously engaged or is unable or forbidden to do so by provisions of this Code or state law. 
(b)  A driver may refuse to convey a passenger if he has reasonable cause to believe that the person intends to violate any law of the city, state, or United States. 
(c)  The provisions of this Code section are not intended to force a driver to convey a passenger if he has reasonable cause to believe that doing so places himself or others in danger. 
(d)  Every driver of a taxicab or limousine shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance, and may refuse employment until so prepaid. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-354)) 
Sec. 14-583. - Availability of service—Taxicabs. 
(a)  All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates shall maintain a central place of business on private property for the operation of the company's business which shall conform to the requirements of the city zoning ordinances and other applicable ordinances of the city and shall provide adequate off-street parking space for all taxicabs not in service. Such place of business shall not be moved except by the approved transfer of the company's certificate by the city administrator to another location. 
(b)  The central place of business shall be kept open 24 hours a day, with the exception of extremely inclement weather. Certificate holders or their employees shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the city as soon as they can do so and if such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time they shall notify the prospective passengers of the estimated time in which the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. 
(c)  Certificate holders with authorization of five or less taxicabs shall be exempt from the 24-hour requirement. A certificate holder operating less than 24 hours per day pursuant to this exemption shall provide to the city administrator, in writing, the operating hours of his company. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-355)) 
Sec. 14-584. - Same—Limousines. 
All persons engaged in the limousine business in the city operating under the provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use limousines. Holders of certificates shall maintain a central place of business on private property for the operation of the company's business which shall conform to the requirements of the city zoning ordinances and other applicable ordinances of the city and shall provide adequate off-street parking space for all limousines not in service. Such place of business shall not be moved except by the approved transfer of the company's certificate by the city administrator to another location. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-356)) 
Sec. 14-585. - Taxicab and limousine certificate holder's records and reports. 
(a)  Every taxicab and limousine certificate holder shall maintain a legible daily manifest upon which is recorded all trips made each day by each driver showing time, place of origin, and destination of each trip and amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the taxicab and limousine company by the driver at least weekly or shall be maintained by the company at its offices at the conclusion of each driver's daily tour of duty. Such manifests shall be retained and preserved in a safe place for at least the calendar year preceding the current calendar year. All forms for such manifests shall be of a character approved by the city administrator. 
(b)  Every taxicab and limousine holder shall maintain the records required by this chapter at a place readily accessible for examination by the city administrator, police chief, or their designees and access shall not be denied at any time of normal operation of the business. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-358)) 
Sec. 14-586. - Report of charges and accidents. 
(a)  Each driver shall report to the city administrator any charges filed against him by any law enforcement officer, including but not limited to minor traffic charges, within 72 hours of the charge being made. Upon request by the city administrator, said driver shall provide such details and/or documents as are available concerning such charges. 
(b)  All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs and limousines in the city which result in death, injury to any person, or damage to any vehicle or property in an amount exceeding $50.00 shall be reported, in writing, within 24 hours to the city administrator. All details concerning such accident shall be provided to the city administrator upon request. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-360)) 
Sec. 14-587. - Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers. 
(a)  No taxicab parking shall be permitted in the corporate limits of the city. However, taxicabs and limousines may park at stands as may be established by the mayor and council upon the recommendation of the city administrator, which taxicab stands shall be designated by signs. 
(1)  Any person desiring to have a place designated as a regular stand for taxicabs and limousines in the city shall make application by written petition addressed to the mayor and council for the establishment of such stand, setting out where such stand is desired to be set apart. The written permission of the property owner whose property abuts shall be first obtained and filed with the application. 
(2)  Whenever any such stand is established, such stand may be used by taxicabs and/or limousines upon a rotation basis of first come-first served. Drivers shall pull into stands from the rear and shall advance forward as the drivers ahead depart. 
(b)  No driver shall solicit passengers for transportation except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such vehicle or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof. The driver of any taxicab or limousine shall remain in the driver's compartment at all times when such vehicle is upon the street; provided, further, that nothing herein shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the side of the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. 
(c)  No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person or vehicle, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(d)  Taxicab drivers shall be permitted to drive taxicabs about the streets of the city for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers. However, it shall be unlawful to cruise about the streets of the city in a limousine to solicit work. 
(e)  Drivers of taxicabs and limousines shall not receive nor discharge passengers in the street but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk or to the extreme right-hand side of the street and there receive or discharge passengers, except on one-way streets where drivers may pull to the sidewalk or extreme right-hand or left-hand side of the street. 
(f)  No driver of a taxicab or limousine shall park or stand on any private property without the permission of the owner, nor in violation clearly marked yellow curbs or no-parking zones. 
(g)  While any taxicab or limousine is parked at a stand or is otherwise in service, the driver will remain awake and alert at all times. Sleeping, lounging in a reclining posture, or lying in the taxicab or limousine is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-362)) 
Sec. 14-588. - Property left in vehicle by passenger. 
Any driver or certificate holder discovering in any taxicab or limousine under his control personal property which was lost or left therein by a passenger of such vehicle shall report such loss and deliver such property to the office of the taxicab or limousine company within 12 hours after the discovery of such property. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the company to identify the owner of the property. The certificate holder shall ensure that all reasonable steps are taken to locate the owner and return said property. The company shall retain the property on behalf of the owner for at least 60 days. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-364)) 
Sec. 14-589. - Drivers smoking in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab or limousine operated upon the streets of the city to smoke in such vehicle while it is occupied by a passenger, without consent of such passenger. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-365)) 
Sec. 14-590. - Receipts. 
The driver of any taxicab or limousine shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, on which shall be the name of the taxicab or limousine company, the vehicle number, name and permit number of the driver, trip origin and destination, amount of charges, and date of transaction. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-366)) 
Sec. 14-591. - Vehicle movement prohibited under certain circumstances. 
No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his taxicab or limousine is in motion. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-367)) 
Sec. 14-592. - Firearms in vehicles. 
Any driver possessing a firearm in a taxicab or limousine must have a current valid state firearms permit and written permission of the taxicab or limousine company. Such driver shall furnish the city administrator a copy of the firearms permit, the brand name, serial number, type, and caliber of the firearm, and the original written permission statement of the taxicab or limousine company, which statement shall be signed by the owner or chief operating officer of the company. 
(Ord. of 5-20-2003, § 1(22-368)) 
Secs. 14-593—14-616. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS 

Sec. 14-617. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  "Dealer in precious metals or gems" means; 
(a)  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
(b)  A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
(2)  "Gems" means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
(3)  "Numismatic coins" means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
(4)  "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
(5)  "Precious metals" means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Sec. 14-618. - Registration as a dealer in precious metals or gems. 
(a)  The city's chief of police shall administer the provisions of this chapter and register dealers in precious metals or gems in the city. 
(b)  Prior to registration as a dealer in precious metals or gems, the person so desiring to register shall fill out the appropriate materials in order to have a background check and criminal history of him or herself, as well as any employee who may engage in the purchase or sale of precious metals or gems. These materials shall be obtained from and returned to the city's police department, and shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of $25.00 to defray the cost of each required background check, criminal history, and review of the same. No person may register as a dealer in precious metals or gems until such background check and criminal history has been completed and returned satisfactory to the chief of police. 
(c)  No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals or gems until he has registered as a dealer in precious metals or gems for each separate place of business. The registration shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the dealer in precious metals or gems. The dealer shall register with the city's chief of police. A copy of each registration shall be transmitted by the city's chief of police to the sheriff of Forsyth County within seven days of the registration. The sheriff of the county shall maintain a record of all registrations, which record shall be available for public inspection. 
(d)  The registration shall contain the name, address, and age of the dealer together with the names, addresses and ages of all other persons having an ownership interest or actually employed in the business other than publicly held corporations. 
(e)  No person shall be eligible to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems if any employee or stockholder, other than stockholders owning less than ten percent of the outstanding shares of a publicly held corporation, has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state or the United States. This subsection shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten years have expired from the date of completion of the felony sentence. 
(f)  All registrations shall contain the address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises. 
(g)  Each dealer shall be required to notify the city's chief of police within seven calendar days of any change in address of the dealer business or any change of ownership in the business. As to any notification of the chief of police, a copy of the change of address or ownership in the business shall be transmitted to the sheriff of the county within seven days of the notification. 
(h)  Each applicant for registration shall possess a current business licenses in the city or shall pay an initial registration fee of $25.00 to be retained by the city to cover the cost of registering such persons. The registration shall be renewed annually upon presentation of a current business license by the dealer or by payment of a renewal fee of $10.00. 
(i)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to authorize any person to transact business as a dealer in precious metals and gems without purchasing a current business license if so required by the city. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Sec. 14-619. - Permanent records required; content. 
(a)  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems the following: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase; 
(2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller; 
(3)  The name, age, and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from such seller's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the seller; 
(4)  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; 
(5)  The price paid for the goods purchased; 
(6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if payment is made by check; and 
(7)  The signature of the seller. 
(b)  The permanent record book required by this article shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least two years. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(c)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery may record the post office record of the mailed parcel in lieu of the seller's age and driver's license number as required in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this section and in lieu of the seller's signature as required in paragraph (7) of subsection (a) of this section. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Sec. 14-620. - Written reports required. 
(a)  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall make a report in writing to the city's chief of police, on forms approved or prescribed by the city's chief of police, of all precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased on the day previous to the date of the report. The report shall contain the information specified in paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection (a) of section 14-619 and shall be typewritten or handwritten in legible English and mailed or delivered to the city's chief of police within 24 hours after the day on which the transactions occurred. 
(b)  All reports shall be maintained in a locked container under the direct supervision of the city's chief of police and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
(c)  The city's chief of police may, in his discretion, authorize any person who demonstrates theft of precious metals or gems by the presenting of an incident report or other similar document to inspect the reports in an effort to locate stolen property. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Sec. 14-621. - Requirements; unlawful activities; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of these provisions, in addition to any violation of state law, for any dealer in precious metals or gems or any agent or employee of a dealer in precious metals or gems who makes purchases of precious metals or gems or of goods made from precious metals or gems to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in the registration provided for in section 14-618; 
(2)  Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record book as required by section 14-619; 
(3)  Make any false entry in such permanent record book; 
(4)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; 
(5)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent record book, or any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
(6)  Sell, exchange, or remove from the legal possession of the buyer, or to alter the form of, any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased by remounting, melting, cutting up, or otherwise altering the original form until at least seven calendar days have elapsed from the time of purchase or acquisition; 
(7)  Fail to make the written report as required in section 14-620; or 
(8)  Purchase any precious metals or gems from any person under 17 years of age. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals or gems without first registering pursuant to section 14-618. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals or gems. 
(d)  If the appropriate law enforcement officer of the city has probable cause to believe that precious metals or gems have been stolen, he may give notice in writing to the dealer to retain the precious metals or gems for an additional 15 days; and it shall be unlawful for the dealer to dispose of the property unless the notice is revoked in writing within the 15-day period. 
(e)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, in addition to any state law violation, and shall be subject to prosecution thereon. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of one of the violations in this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Sec. 14-622. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Sec. 14-623. - Effective date. 
The ordinance codified in this article shall be effective upon its adoption by the Governing Authority of the City of Gumming, Georgia. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Sec. 14-624. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of the ordinance shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of the ordinance as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of the ordinance not so held to be invalid, or the application of the ordinance to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that the ordinance would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Sec. 14-625. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts thereof in conflict with the ordinance codified in this article are hereby repealed. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017 ) 
Secs. 14-626—14-649. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MASSAGE PARLORS 

Sec. 14-650. - Purpose and legislative findings. 
The Georgia General Assembly has declared that the licensed practice of massage therapy by health care professionals is an activity affecting and benefiting the public interest and involving the health, safety, and welfare of the public, but that the illegal and illicit practice of physical and bodily manipulation by a person who is not licensed under the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1, et seq.) is a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city agrees with those findings. Furthermore, the city finds that, for some massage establishments, the business in fact is sexual conduct or the intimation of sexual conduct, rather than lawful massage therapy. Such establishments offer massage services as a subterfuge for prostitution, masturbation for hire, and other paid sexual contact, which are harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. There is difficulty and expense in conclusively distinguishing between such establishments and legitimate massage or spa establishments by licensed or certified health care professionals, but one criteria that may assist in distinguishing a legitimate versus illegitimate operator is whether the establishment has a relationship with a corporate or franchising hierarchy, which would tend to provide a check against unlawful sexual activities on the massage establishment premises because illegal activity would have repercussions on the corporate/franchise affiliation. The recitation of this criterion is not intended to impugn the integrity or motivation of the many wholly-independent, legitimate providers; it is simply one of many factors that may be legitimately considered. It is a purpose of this article to impose city licensing requirements to help prevent illegal massage, prostitution, sex trafficking and related sex crimes, without hindering legitimate massage or spa establishments operating under a business structure with external oversight that serves that purpose. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22 (allowing local regulation of massage businesses and of persons not licensed by the state), it is the purpose of this article to regulate the operation of massage and spa establishments, and to regulate employees of such establishments who are not licensed as massage therapists by the state, as an exercise of the city's police power in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-651. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except with the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity applying for a license to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment, as defined herein, or a person applying for a work permit, as provided for herein. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of city and shall include his or her designee and/or officer(s). Specifically included as a potential designee of the chief of police shall be the sheriff of Forsyth County, Georgia. 
Employee means any person who performs any service on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, apprentice, trainee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person who is licensed or provisionally permitted pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapist Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 42.24A-1, et seq.), or a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure when performed by a person who is licensed by the state to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry or medicine. This term shall not include touching of the scalp or ears while providing a haircut, or touching of the hands or feet while providing a manicure or pedicure, by a person licensed by the Georgia State Board of Cosmetology. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means a commercial establishment where any person offers or provides massage. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments, facilities or businesses separately licensed as such by the state. 
Police department means the City of Cumming Police Department. However, should the chief of police designate the sheriff of Forsyth County, Georgia as his designee for the purpose of enforcement and administration of this article, then and in that event the Forsyth County Sheriff's Department shall serve the same functions as are designated hereunder for the city police department. 
Premises means the real property, or portion thereof, upon which the massage establishment or spa establishment is located including, but not limited to, the establishment and the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages under the ownership or control of the establishment. 
Spa establishment means a commercial establishment that offers or engages in personal services that call for the patron to disrobe, such as body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments, facilities or businesses separately licensed as such by the state. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following specified crimes: 
(a)  Illegal gambling; 
(b)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, sodomy, aggravated sodomy, rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
(c)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
(d)  Any offense related to any massage establishment or spa establishment, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; 
(e)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(f)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-652. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in sections 1-10 and/or 1-11. Nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder shall be held to exclude such other civil, criminal, or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this Code or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-653. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses and work permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to operate or work at the establishment specified in the license or work permit during the term of the license or work permit only, and shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state. 
(b)  This article shall not be enforced against: 
(1)  Any natural person who is a physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, massage therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of the profession for which the person is licensed by the state; 
(2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment, including a physician's, physical therapists, or chiropractor's office, separately licensed as such by the state; or 
(3)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(c)  Licenses and work permits issued before the adoption of this article shall continue in effect for their original terms, subject to the regulations herein, including the provisions in section 14-659 as amended. 
(d)  All massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall comply with this article upon its adoption, including those that hold a license or a work permit issued before the adoption of this article. 
(e)  The chief of police may exempt a massage establishment or a spa establishment owned or operated by a licensed massage therapist and its employees and licensed contractors from the licensing requirements of sections 14-654, 14-655, and 14-656 for a specified calendar year. An exemption under this subsection expires on December 31 of the year for which it was granted. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the establishment and its employees are subject to all requirements of sections 14-654, 14-655, and 14-656. Any request for an exemption shall be submitted in writing to the chief of police. The request for an exemption is automatically rejected unless the chief of police grants the exemption. An exemption, if granted by the chief of police, shall be issued in writing and shall be based upon the following, non-exhaustive list of considerations: 
(1)  Whether the establishment is part of a chain that operates in multiple locations under common ownership, franchise agreements, or a similar arrangement that involves centralized control or corporate supervision; 
(2)  Whether all persons employed or working at the establishment are licensed massage therapists; 
(3)  The establishment's, its owners', and its managers' histories relative to compliance with massage establishment or spa establishment licensing requirements; 
(4)  Whether the location used by the establishment has been free from association with unlawful activity for the last 36 months; and 
(5)  Whether the establishment is operated by a person who has been continually licensed pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act for at least four years. The four-year consideration evidences that a licensed individual has secured and maintained the license for a reasonable duration. However, possessing a license for less than four years shall not automatically preclude receipt of an exemption. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-654. - Massage/spa establishment license required; application. 
(a)  Massage/spa establishment license required. It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city without a valid massage/spa establishment license or exemption therefrom. This license requirement is in addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate pursuant to chapter 14, article II, pertaining to taxation. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a massage/spa establishment license shall file in person at the city police department, a completed application made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be executed by the person primarily responsible for the operation of the establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the application must also be executed by an officer, member, partner or shareholder, as applicable. Signatures on the application shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the information and/or items required in this subsection (b), accompanied by the annual regulatory fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, a signed and sworn affidavit verifying the lawful presence of each person that executes the application on behalf of the applicant. 
(3)  A signed and sworn affidavit attesting that the applicant either uses the federal work authorization program in accordance with federal regulations or that the applicant employs fewer than 11 people or otherwise does not fall within the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
(4)  Current business address and residential mailing address for the applicant. 
(5)  The business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the establishment. 
(6)  If the applicant is a sole proprietor, photo I.D. with date of birth, in the form of a valid Georgia Secure Driver's License or other photo identification accepted by the city's police department. 
(7)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor, then the partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall submit a complete list of the legal entity's: 
a.  Officers; 
b.  Directors; 
c.  Partners, members, or shareholders (natural persons) holding a ten-percent or greater ownership interest in such legal entity, or if there is no shareholder (natural person) with at least a ten-percent interest, the ten shareholders with the greatest ownership interest; 
d.  Employee or agent primarily responsible for operation of the massage or spa establishment; and 
e.  Photo I.D. with date of birth, in the form of a valid Georgia Secure Driver's License or other photo identification accepted by the city's police department for each person listed in subparts a. through d., above. 
(8)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked; 
c.  Engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment; 
d.  Engaged in or allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; 
e.  Knowingly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; or 
f.  Has allowed, been convicted of, or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to one or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. 
(9)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) has been arrested for, convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such arrest and/or conviction. 
(10)  A statement of whether the applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) has in the previous 12 months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked; 
c.  Engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment; 
d.  Engaged in or allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; 
f.  Knowingly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; or 
g.  Has allowed, been convicted of, or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to one or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. 
(11)  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state and must submit copies of the certificate of organization or incorporation, as applicable, and articles of organization or incorporation, as applicable. 
(12)  A sworn and notarized statement of a registered agent who is a resident of Forsyth County, Georgia and at least 18 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the applicant. 
(13)  A statement whether the applicant is the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. If the applicant is a lease holder, a copy of the lease shall be submitted with the license application. 
(14)  Reserved. 
(15)  For every person on the premises who offers, or will offer, services for which a license under O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1, et seq. is required, a copy of the state license for each such person as well as a color photograph, no smaller than two inches by two inches, showing the face, neck, and shoulders of each such person; or, if there are none, a statement certifying that no person on the premises offers, or will offer, services for which said person is required to be licensed by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-l, et seq. 
(16)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints for all persons required to sign the application to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as specified under Georgia law. Once an application, accompanying documents, and the required investigative and license fees are filed with the police department, the police department shall conduct a criminal investigation of the applicant and prepare a written criminal investigation report detailing all information relating to fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, and other matters pertinent to law enforcement. Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the police department will transmit both sets of fingerprints and appropriate fees to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and, if necessary, submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a comparison with nationwide records. The results of the Federal Bureau of Investigation check will be returned to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which will disseminate the state and national results to the police department. Upon completion of the criminal investigation report, the police department shall assemble the tendered application forms and accompanying documents relating to investigation and processing of the application. 
(c)  The information provided pursuant to subsection (b) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the police department within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed to the public only as required under governing law. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to any required disclosure under the Georgia Open Records Act or other applicable law. 
(e)  Issuance of license. Upon the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment license application, the chief of police shall cause to be conducted a criminal background investigation, as set forth above, of the applicant. Within 60 days of the filing of the application, the chief of police or his or her designee shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of denial of the license to the applicant. The chief of police or his or her designee shall issue the license unless: 
(1)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) is less than 21 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The applicant is neither the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated, nor the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. 
(4)  The annual regulatory fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  The city has revoked a massage/spa establishment license at the premises within the previous 36 months. 
(7)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked; 
c.  Engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment; 
d.  Engaged in or allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; 
e.  Knowingly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; or 
f.  Has allowed, been convicted of, or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to one or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. 
(8)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(9)  The establishment does not comply with all applicable building, health, and life safety codes, or the building to be occupied does not have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(10)  The applicant or a person listed in response to subsection (b)(7) has in the previous 12 months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked; 
c.  Engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment; 
d.  Engaged in or allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; 
e.  Knowingly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; or 
f.  Has allowed, been convicted of, or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to one or more violations of this Article within a 12-month period. 
(11)  Reserved. 
(12)  The applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal entity that is required to be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state, but is not so chartered or authorized. 
(f)  A license, if issued, shall be issued in the name of the applicant. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment so that it may be read at any time that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(g)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall post each employee's work permit issued by the city and all state-issued massage licenses in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment so that it may be read at any time that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-655. - Regulatory fee; expiration. 
(a)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee, consisting of a nonrefundable investigative fee and a license fee, for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the city. The investigative and license fees shall be set by resolution of the mayor and council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the mayor and council. The full regulatory fee shall be paid with the license application and shall not be prorated under any circumstances. If the applicant withdraws the application or the license is denied, the applicant shall be refunded the full license fee paid. No refund shall be allowed once the license has been issued. 
(b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and expire on December 31 of each year. Each subsequent application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. Existing licensees shall file applications by November 1 of each year for the following license year. Applications received after November 1 shall be subject to a ten-percent late fee. 
(c)  No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-656. - Employee work permits required. 
(a)  Massage/spa establishment work permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this article, of a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city without a valid massage/spa establishment work permit, except that a person who holds a valid massage/spa establishment license, satisfies the criteria of subsection 14-653(b)(1), or who is listed in response to subsections 14-654(b)(7)a. through c. in relation to a valid massage/spa establishment license shall not be required to also obtain a massage/spa establishment work permit to be an "employee" at that particular licensed establishment. A person who works at more than one establishment shall obtain a separate work permit for each establishment. No applicant for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall work at a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city until the applicant receives, and the establishment posts, the employee's work permit as required by this article. A receipt issued by the city is not a valid massage/spa establishment work permit and does not authorize the person to work in a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall file in person at the police department, a completed application made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be signed and notarized. Applicants shall make themselves available for photographing. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the information and/or items required in this subsection (b), accompanied by the work permit fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Photo I.D. with date of birth, in the form of a valid Georgia Secure Driver's License or other photo identification accepted by the police department. 
(4)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(5)  The name and address of the massage establishment or spa establishment for which the applicant seeks to obtain the work permit. 
(6)  A statement of whether the applicant has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked; 
c.  Engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment; 
d.  Engaged in or allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; 
e.  Knowingly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; or 
f.  Has allowed, been convicted of, or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to one or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. 
(7)  A statement of whether the applicant has been arrested for, convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such arrest and/or conviction. 
(8)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any massage/spa establishment work permit, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as specified under Georgia law. Once an application, accompanying documents, and the required investigative and license fees are filed with the police department, the police department shall conduct a criminal investigation of the applicant and prepare a written criminal investigation report detailing all information relating to fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, and other matters pertinent to law enforcement. Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the police department will transmit both sets of fingerprints and appropriate fees to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and, if necessary, submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a comparison with nationwide records. The results of the Federal Bureau of Investigation check will be returned to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which will disseminate the state and national results to the police department. Upon completion of the criminal investigation report, the police department shall assemble the tendered application forms and accompanying documents relating to investigation and processing of the application. 
(c)  The information provided pursuant to subsection (b) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the police department within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  The information provided by an applicant about an application for a work permit under this article shall be maintained on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed to the public only as required under governing law. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to any required disclosure under the Georgia Open Records Act or other applicable law. 
(e)  Issuance of work permit. Upon the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment work permit application, the chief of police shall cause to be conducted a criminal background investigation of the applicant. Within 15 days of the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment work permit application, the chief of police or his or her designee shall either issue a work permit to the applicant or issue a written notice of denial of the work permit to the applicant. The chief of police or his or her designee shall issue the work permit unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a work permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The work permit fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The establishment for which the applicant seeks a work permit does not have a valid massage/spa establishment license from the City. 
(5)  The applicant has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked; 
c.  Engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment; or 
d.  Engaged in or allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; 
e.  Knowingly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; or 
f.  Has allowed, been convicted of, or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to one or more violations of this article within a 12-month period. 
(6)  The applicant has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(f)  The work permit, if issued, will be valid for a period of one year from the date it is issued. Replacement and additional work permit(s) shall be issued upon payment of one-half of the fee charged for a work permit and will expire the same date as the then-current work permit. A massage establishment or spa establishment employee shall provide the employee's work permit to the establishment for which it was issued to be posted on the premises pursuant to this article. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose work permit has been revoked to refuse to return the work permit to the police department or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the work permit. 
(h)  The work permit fee for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall be set by resolution of the mayor and council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-657. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall keep on file, on the premises of the establishment, a list of all persons who perform any service on the premises of the establishment, their home addresses and home or mobile telephone numbers, their duties and services performed for the massage or spa establishment, whether such person has a massage/spa establishment work permit issued by the city, and whether such person has a license or provisional permit issued by the state pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act. The holder of a massage/spa establishment license must also keep on file, on the premises of the establishment, a copy of the establishment's two most recent license applications. 
(b)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall maintain correct and accurate records of each instance that a service is provided, the type of service provided, and the name of the person at the establishment who provided the service. The records shall be subject to inspection by the city administrator, the chief of police, and their designees during those times when the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(c)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall allow any person required to have any state mandated licenses, or a massage/spa establishment work permit pursuant to this article, to perform any service on the premises until such person has procured such license or work permit. Licensees and all managers and/or supervisors of any massage or spa establishment are required by this article to verify that each employee's valid state license or city work permit, as the case may be, is posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment at all times such that it may be read at any time the establishment is occupied by patrons or open to the public and failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. No person on the premises engaging in massage for which a state license is required shall refuse to provide a copy of the person's state massage therapy license upon request by any customer or city official. 
(d)  Each massage establishment and spa establishment shall have, at a minimum, a licensed massage therapist, on the premises at all hours that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. If during an inspection there is no licensed massage therapist on the premise, the establishment must cease operations and close until a licensed massage therapist is on the premises. 
(e)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years. Records shall be made available to the city administrator, the chief of police, or their designee, during business hours, at the establishment's business location in the city. City officials shall use reasonable efforts under the circumstances to minimize business interruption when seeking records under this subsection and will otherwise comply with all applicable state or federal laws with respect to health-related protected information. 
(f)  All employees and other persons on the premises, with the exception of customers receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist, shall be completely clothed. For the purposes of this article, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck, and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. No bras, bikini tops, bustier, or like clothing may be exposed. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(g)  No employee may disrobe or in any way expose his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or the areola or nipple of the female breast on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(h)  No customer receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist shall expose his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or the areola or nipple of the female breast to another person on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. The prohibition against a customer exposing the areola or nipple of the female breast while receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist shall not apply when the massage therapist is certified to provide oncology massage or manual lymphatic drainage massage. 
(i)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall be or remain open for business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. No person shall be or remain inside a massage establishment or spa establishment between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. No massage establishment or spa establishment shall hold itself out as open at a time that the establishment is prohibited, under this subsection, from being open for business. 
(j)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(k)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building code, as adopted by the mayor and council, and at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts (or equivalent illumination) shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(l)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(m)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall knowingly allow any minor (i.e., a person under the age of 18) to be or remain inside the massage establishment or spa establishment unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or a person who is at least 21 years of age and has been entrusted with the minor by the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(n)  No person shall knowingly touch, manipulate, fondle, or handle in any manner the sexual organs, genital area, or anus of any other person on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(o)  Reserved. 
(p)  Reserved. 
(q)  It shall be unlawful to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment with storefront windows that have material and glazing applied or affixed that reduces light transmission through the windows to less than 32 percent, plus or minus three percent, or increase light reflectance to more than 20 percent. 
(r)  Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall ensure that storefront windows are not blocked by curtains, blinds, or any other screening material during those times when the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(s)  All patrons of massage and spa establishments shall be required to enter and exit the establishment via the establishment's front door. For purposes of this paragraph, the front door of the establishment shall be that door along the store-front portion of the establishment where signage announcing the business is placed and where the primary pedestrian or vehicular traffic occurs. 
(t)  No employee may assist any customer in showering, nor shall any employee make any physical contact with a customer while the customer is showering. 
(u)  Upon the conviction of, or entry of plea of guilty or nolo contendere, for an offense under this article by any employee or licensee of a massage establishment, the police department shall provide notice of such conviction or plea to the record owner of the premises in which the massage establishment is operated by certified mail. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-658. - Inspection. 
Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall permit the city administrator, chief of police, and/or their designees or agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, any portion of the establishment premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the regulations of this article, during those times when the establishment is occupied by any patron or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-659. - Revocation of license or work permit. 
(a)  No license or permit issued under this article shall be suspended (except as provided for in subsection (b)), revoked, or placed on probation, except for due cause as defined in subsection (c) hereof, and after a hearing before mayor and council upon reasonable notice to the licensee or permittee of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing and of the reason why the permit should be suspended or revoked. At least 15 days written notice shall be deemed reasonable. 
(b)  The city administrator may suspend a license or permit issued under this article immediately or give 15 days' written notice that such license or permit is subject to suspension when there is cause to believe that grounds exist for suspending the license or permit prior to the conduct of a hearing before the mayor and council. This action shall be reviewed by the mayor and council at its next regular meeting, or, at the request of the licensee or permittee, a special meeting of the mayor and council may be called within 15 days after such request is filed with the police department, and the mayor and council may either affirm or overturn the suspension after the hearing of evidence. A license or permit issued under this article shall not be revoked or placed on probation except upon action by the mayor and council. 
(c)  "Due cause" for the suspension, revocation, or placement on probation of a license or permit issued under this article shall include any of the following: 
(1)  The licensee or work permit holder has failed to maintain the qualifications for holding a license or work permit; 
(2)  The licensee or work permit holder has given false information in the application for the license or the employee work permit or has failed to supplement the application information as required by subsection 14-654(b) or subsection 14-656(b) after a change of circumstances that rendered the information originally submitted false or incomplete; 
(3)  The licensee or work permit holder has failed to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this article; 
(4)  The licensee or work permit holder has engaged m or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment; 
(5)  The licensee or work permit holder has engaged in or allowed sodomy, aggravated sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct to occur in or on the premises of the establishment; 
(6)  The licensee or work permit holder has knowingly allowed a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the establishment; 
(7)  The licensee or work permit holder has violated subsection 14-657(c); 
(8)  The licensee or work permit holder has knowingly allowed any minor (i.e., a person under the age of 18) to be or remain inside the massage establishment or spa establishment unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or a person who is at least 21 years of age and has been entrusted with the minor by the minor's parent or legal guardian; or 
(9)  The licensee or work permit holder has allowed one or more violations of this article within a 12-month period; or 
(10)  The licensee or work permit holder has been convicted of any specified criminal activity. 
(d)  The mayor and council may specify conditions of operation of the permit holder during any period of probation. Such conditions shall be on file with the police department. No probation shall extend over a period of more than 36 consecutive calendar months. 
(e)  When any person listed on a massage/spa establishment license application, any employee of the establishment, or any person who performs massage at the establishment, is arrested for unlawful sexual conduct of any kind alleged to have occurred at the massage establishment or spa establishment, no person listed on the establishment's license application and no employee of the establishment may apply for or be issued any new license or permit for that location under Code of the city, chapter 4, or chapter 14, articles II through XII, until the arrestee is cleared or until 90 days following the arrest have passed, whichever occurs sooner. If a conviction occurs as a result of the arrest, then such conviction shall serve as a disqualifying event as set forth in sections 14-654 and 14-656. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-660. - Remedies. 
(a)  Any premises, building, dwelling, or other structure in which a massage establishment or spa establishment is operated or maintained in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the Superior Court of Forsyth County, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin the use of such premises as a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(b)  The operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment by a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the Superior Court of Forsyth County, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin such operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(c)  The operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment by a person in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city's legal counsel may bring an action in the Superior Court of Forsyth County, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, to restrain, prohibit, and/or enjoin such operation of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(d)  It shall not be necessary, in order to obtain an injunction under this section, to allege or prove that there is no adequate remedy at law or to allege or prove any special injury. 
(e)  If the court declares a massage establishment or spa establishment to be a nuisance, or if the court issues an injunction against a massage establishment or spa establishment pursuant to this article, or any other applicable law, the city shall be entitled, on motion, to recover its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in bringing the action. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Sec. 14-661. - Designation and assistance in administration. 
The chief of police may, in his discretion, designate the Sheriff of Forsyth County as his designee for the purpose of administration and enforcement of this article. Upon acceptance of that designation the said sheriff and the Forsyth County Sheriff's Department shall serve the functions of the chief of police and police department, respectively, as are described in this article. Such designations shall continue until such time as either party gives notice of the intent to cease the designee relationship, or until such time as an agreement memorializing the designee relationship, if any, expires. 
( Ord. of 3-20-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Chapter 16 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Secs. 16-2—16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS, LOTS, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; nuisance buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq. 

Sec. 16-21. - Definitions. 
The definitions in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 apply to this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-101; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 16-22. - Legislative findings. 
It is hereby found there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures: 
(1)  That are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  That lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; 
(4)  That are vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. 
State Law reference— Required finding, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-6, 41-2-9(a). 
Sec. 16-23. - Administration. 
The chief of police shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article and is appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-102; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 2) 
State Law reference— Mandatory that public officer be designated for enforcement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a). 
Sec. 16-24. - Duty of property owners. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a). 
Sec. 16-25. - Duties of the chief of police. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the police department by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use, or whenever it appears to the chief of police (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, or structure: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
the chief of police shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the chief of police's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall: identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(b)  If after the notice and hearing the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration: is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove and demolish such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
(c)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the chief of police may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The chief of police shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)  The chief of police is authorized to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to particular properties, he shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use. If the chief of police has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The chief of police and the mayor and council are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(e)  The amount of the cost of the demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(f)  Review of a municipal court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Code 1998, § 18-103; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a), (d). 
Sec. 16-26. - Powers of the chief of police. 
The chief of police shall have the following powers in addition to others granted in this article: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; however, such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Code 1998, § 18-104; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 4) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
Sec. 16-27. - Determination of unfitness. 
(a)  The chief of police may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure that are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals: 
(1)  Of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; 
(2)  Of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or 
(3)  Of other residents of the city. 
(b)  The chief of police may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed; such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Unsightliness. 
(Code 1998, § 18-105; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-10. 
Sec. 16-28. - Enforcement of lien. 
(a)  The lien provided for in this article shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this article. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the chief of police shall transmit to the city administrator a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the person who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.; provided, however, that the limitation in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the mayor and council. 
(c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(d)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the mayor and council, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(e)  The mayor and council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Code 1998, § 18-106; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-9(b), (c). 
Sec. 16-29. - Service of complaints or orders. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the chief of police shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the chief of police shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. 
(2)  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Code 1998, § 18-107; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
Sec. 16-30. - Injunctions. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the chief of police may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the chief of police from carrying out the provisions of the order referred to in section 16-29; and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the chief of police pending the final disposition of the cause; however, such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the chief of police. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; however, it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
(Code 1998, § 18-108; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13. 
Sec. 16-31. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed, except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Code 1998, § 18-109; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-14. 
Sec. 16-32. - Authority to use revenues, grants and donations to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
The city may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of ordinances adopted in connection with the exercise of the powers granted under this article. 
(Code 1998, § 18-110; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-15. 
Sec. 16-33. - Construction of this article with Charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of the Charter or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. 
(Code 1998, § 18-111; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-16. 
Sec. 16-34. - Noise control. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Cumming (the "city") through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(b)  Sound measurement standards for law enforcement personnel. For the purposes of this section 16-34, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth below which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
b.  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof: as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. 
(2)  Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
a.  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, or motor vehicle or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
b.  Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the place on public streets and sidewalks, or in the case of private real property, beyond the property limits, on which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
c.  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 mid night and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
d.  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. 
(3)  Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, or commercial entities in the normal course of their business; 
b.  Noises and/or sounds emanating from any official University of North Georgia event on University of North Georgia property or any Forsyth County School District event on Forsyth County School District property; 
c.  Noises and/or sounds that are part of a special event sanctioned by the city including, but not limited to, community celebrations on or in recognition of holidays (i.e. the 4th of July Steam Engine Parade), and events held at the Cumming Fairgrounds; 
d.  Sound volumes produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle on a street or highway, which sound is controlled by the O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; or 
e.  Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions. 
(4)  Time restrictions on use of landscape maintenance motorized devices such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws. It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape maintenance devices, including, but not limited to, leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws, within any residential zoning district or in areas within 300 feet of any residential zoning district from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(5)  Construction noise. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., construction noise of any type, including, but not limited to, noise caused by the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any earth-moving equipment, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment, shall not be plainly audible within any residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noise emanates. 
A variance from the above-referenced hours of operation for construction noise may be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours prior to the proposed construction operation, for consideration by the director of the planning and zoning department. Such a request shall state: 
a.  The reasons that support a claim of urgent need based on specific loss or inconvenience for such a variation from the allowable work hours; 
b.  The impact that the denial of this request would have on the applicant's project and the surrounding properties; 
c.  The steps which have been taken by the applicant to communicate those needs and impacts to owners of surrounding and nearby properties; 
d.  The steps that have or will be taken to limit the impact of the proposed activity upon surrounding and nearby properties; and 
e.  The possible risks to public health and safety. 
If the director finds that the application adequately demonstrates the urgent need for a variance from the above allowable work hours, adequately provides for mitigation of the impact upon surrounding and nearby properties, and poses no additional risk to public health and safety, then permission shall be granted for a variance to alter the allowable work hours during one ten-day period. 
The prohibitions of this subparagraph (6) shall not apply to government road, water, sewer, stormwater construction or maintenance projects or to utility company construction, maintenance, or service restoration projects. 
(6)  Commercial entities near single-family residential zoning districts. 
a.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of subsection (c), "prohibited conduct," subparagraph (1), concerning "restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday" and its subparts a. through c. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential zoning district more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
b.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of subsection (c), "prohibited conduct," subparagraph (2), concerning "restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday," and its subparts a. through c. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single- family residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
( Ord. of 1-16-2018, § 1 ) 
Sec. 16-35. - Odor pollution. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the emission of any substance or combination of substances which creates or contributes to a nuisance odor in the ambient air, potentially injurious to health or offensive to the senses of a reasonable person. 
(1)  A nuisance odor is that which interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or the free use of property, considering the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the health, general welfare, property, or use of property of the people affected, and the location of the odor source and character of the area or neighborhood affected. Whether the emissions source was present in the location prior to subsequent development shall not be a consideration. 
(2)  "Emission" or "emitting" shall mean any discharging, giving off, sending forth, placing, dispensing, scattering, issuing, circulating, releasing, or any other emanation of any air contaminant or contaminants into the atmosphere. 
(b)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing, throwing or discharging from any residence, business, premises, or vehicle and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(c)  The city shall use reasonable efforts to investigate all odor complaints and undertake enforcement and regulatory measures necessary to abate nuisance odors. In determining whether an odor constitutes a nuisance and the severity of the nuisance, information shall be gathered by the city, including, but not limited to, complaints from citizens of, or individuals who work in the city, and site inspections or surveys. The property from which a nuisance odor emanates shall be subject to administrative inspection by city personnel as follows: 
(1)  An administrative inspection is warranted if the department receives two or more complaints from individuals representing separate households or businesses within the city limits, within a 30-day period relating to a single odor description, and the department takes steps to reasonably verify the source of the odor. To be considered an odor complaint the city must have a record of it, which must include the: 
a.  Name, address and phone number of person making the complaint. 
b.  Time and date of call. 
c.  Description of odor nuisance, including estimated location or source of complaint, and if possible, prevailing wind or weather conditions observed. 
(2)  For any administrative inspection conducted to address matters under this section, city personnel shall identify themselves clearly to the owner, manager, lessee, or employee on site when they arrive. The city personnel shall explain why they are present and shall request to perform an administrative inspection related to this section. The owner, manager, lessee or employee on site shall have the right to request that, prior to the administrative inspection taking place, the city submit the matter for review to the Municipal Court of the City of Cumming, the judge of which shall determine whether probable cause exists for the administrative inspection. If such a request is made, the city personnel shall submit their request for an administrative inspection to the said court, and the court shall issue a written determination as to whether the administrative inspection may go forward. 
(3)  Nothing contained in this section shall limit or prohibit law enforcement personnel from seeking and obtaining a search warrant or, in appropriate cases, conducting a warrantless search, for the purpose of enforcing this section or any other local, state or federal law. 
(d)  Regardless of whether any nuisance odor has been declared, any person, firm, or entity engaged within the city limits in one or more of the following activities shall provide the city with an odor abatement plan: 
(1)  Pet food manufacturing; 
(2)  Rendering and meat byproduct processing; 
(3)  Asphalt shingle and coating materials manufacturing; 
(4)  Petroleum refining; 
(5)  Sewage treatment; 
(6)  Wood preservation; 
(7)  Meat processing including, but not limited to, pork, poultry, and beef processing; 
(8)  Processes related to industrial wastewater pretreatment; 
(9)  On-site storage of offal or offal hauling; 
(10)  Any other activity determined by the city council through a resolution to cause, or be likely to cause, nuisance odors. 
(e)  The odor abatement plan shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Identify the odors or sources of odors from the activity which requires the odor abatement plan; 
(2)  Shall provide the process or processes by which the odors from the activity requiring he odor abatement plan shall not exceed an odor detection threshold (D/T) of one volume of the odorous air as diluted with seven or more volumes of odor-free air; 
(3)  Provide a detailed plan on any proposed operational changes to the existing odor control equipment in order to control and mitigate the odor(s) being generated; 
(4)  Establish a timeline for development and implementation of a professional engineer-approved treatment technology, which may include monitoring instrumentation and equipment to ensure future compliance. 
(5)  Shall include the measurement schedule pursuant to which the submitting party will provide ambient air measurements at the property line using an olfactometer or similar instrument, device, or method designated by the City of Cumming to be used in the determination of the intensity of the odor(s); 
(6)  Shall provide for the plan itself and the measurements taken pursuant to the plan to be submitted to the city's industrial pretreatment coordinator; and 
(7)  Shall provide for the city's industrial pretreatment coordinator to be notified of any changes to the odor control system or plant processes that would result in a significant change in the production of odors or odor control processes. 
(f)  The odor abatement plan called for in this section shall be developed, provided and implemented within six months of the passage of the ordinance codified in this section with respect to any activity on a specific property in the City of Cumming which is ongoing at the time of the passage of the ordinance. All other odor abatement plans shall be developed, provided and implemented in conjunction with the development of the property and the activity that will create the odor to be controlled. 
(g)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(2)  In addition to the penalties provided for above, nothing shall prohibit the city or its counsel from filing an action to abate a nuisance under state law. 
(h)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Pursuant to state law, no activity or odor shall be declared a nuisance which meets all of the exception requirements of O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  No odor shall be declared a nuisance if that odor emanates from food preparation in residential areas, including outdoor cooking such as grilling. 
(i)  Nothing in this section is intended to conflict with or supersede the Federal Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 7661, et seq., or the Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 
( Ord. of 10-16-2018, § 1 ) 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Regulations and requirements for bail bonding as promulgated by the office of the chief of police are compiled and edited separately by the city. Official copies of such rules and regulations are on file in the offices of the city clerk and chief of police. 

Sec. 18-1. - Penalty. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 18-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous, or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Such unlawful disorderly conduct shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made, except which occurs in organized boxing, martial arts, or wrestling exhibitions or training programs organized and presented as part of a recognized athletic program or lawfully presented entertainment event. 
(2)  The commission of a reckless or knowing act that may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(Code 1998, § 42-1) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 18-3. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be and appear in an intoxicated condition upon any street or sidewalk of the city or in any other public place or private business premises patronized by the public, when such condition results in boisterous, disruptive or annoying behavior that interferes with the lawful pursuits of others. 
(Code 1998, § 42-2) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 18-4. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage while a pedestrian in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place within the city, or within any public building. 
(Code 1998, § 42-3) 
Sec. 18-5. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when: 
(1)  Without the owner's permission, he congregates on or about the premises of a business at a time when that business is not open or about to be opened to the public; 
(2)  Without the owner's permission, he congregates on or about the premises of a business then open to the public for a purpose other than visiting that business; or 
(3)  He is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Amongst the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any subject. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern that would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or explain his presence and conduct. 
(b)  A person committing the offense of loitering shall be prosecuted in the municipal court and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1998, § 42-4; Ord. of 8-21-1984) 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 18-6. - Smoking in or on city property. 
(1)  Title. This section shall be known as the City of Cumming Smoking Ordinance. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit smoking in all buildings owned, leased, or operated by the city and to prohibit smoking in all city vehicles. It is further the purpose of this section to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the public and city employees. 
(3)  Definitions. Unless otherwise defined expressly below, the words and phrases used in this section shall have their ordinary and customary meaning attached to them. 
(a)  Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, holding, or carrying any lighted tobacco product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco. 
(b)  City building means any enclosed or partially enclosed building or structure which is owned, leased, or operated by the city, including, but not limited to, offices, work areas, storage areas, shop areas, lobbies, break rooms, restrooms, meeting rooms or any other enclosed or partially enclosed area within a building or structure. 
(c)  City vehicle means any vehicle which is owned by or otherwise under the exclusive control of the city. 
(4)  Prohibitions, jurisdiction and enforcement. 
(a)  Smoking is prohibited in all buildings owned, leased, or operated by the city. 
(b)  Smoking is prohibited in all city vehicles at all times. 
(c)  Employees are prohibited from smoking in front of the public at all times while on duty and may only smoke on city property in designated smoking areas. 
(d)  The city may, in its discretion, establish and designate with appropriate signage outdoor smoking areas on city property that are physically removed from any building or building entrance so as to ensure that no member of the public or city employee is exposed to secondhand smoke. 
(e)  The city's police department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section through the issuance of citations. Citations shall be issued by the city's police department in accordance with its policy. 
(f)  The city court shall have jurisdiction to hear all cases related to alleged violation of this section. 
(g)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for a monetary penalty not to exceed $500.00 per violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(h)  Any city employee violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to discipline up to and including termination pursuant to the terms of the employee policies and procedures. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2010, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 18-7. - State promulgated rules and regulations. 
(1)  Rules adopted. The following rules and regulations of the Georgia DPH, including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, and which are expressly incorporated herein, are hereby adopted and approved by the city for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(a)  Food Service, Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-14. 
(b)  Tourist Accommodations, Comp. R. & Regs. § 511-6-2. 
(c)  On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Comp. R. & Regs. § 511-3-1, 
(d)  Drinking Water Supply, Comp. R. & Regs. § 511-3-3. 
(e)  Solid Waste, Comp. R. & Regs. § 511-3-4. 
(f)  Swimming Pools and Recreational Water Parks, Comp. R. & Regs, § 511-3-5. 
(g)  Special On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Comp. R. & Regs. § 511-3-6. 
(h)  The Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005, Comp. R. & Regs. § 511-3-7. 
Copies of those DPH rules and regulations are available at the DPH web site. 
(2)  Local board of health enactments. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1, et seq., in addition to the above-referenced rules and regulations of the Georgia DPH, the following rules and regulations have been enacted by the Forsyth County Board of Health and are hereby adopted by the city in accordance with state law, and are further hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(a)  Rules and regulations concerning solid waste nuisance, enacted by resolution dated September 10, 2002, which are made a part hereof as though fully set out at length in this section. 
(b)  Rules and regulations concerning temporary toilet facilities, enacted by resolution dated September 12, 2006, which are made a part hereof as though fully set out at length in this section. 
(c)  Rules and regulations concerning rabies control, having been adopted on March 11, 2002, which are made a part hereof as though fully set out at length in this section. Copies of those rules and regulations enacted by the Forsyth County Board of Health and having been adopted by ordinance of the city are on file at the Forsyth County Board of Health and on its website. 
(3)  Safe development. In addition, the rules and regulations concerning minimum lot sizes for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems, which are contained in the department of public health division of public health manual for on-site sewage management systems are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set out at length herein. The city may, however, require larger minimum lot sizes for utilization of on-site sewage management systems in zoning or land use districts providing for septic service, and in the event there is a conflict between the minimum lot size(s) set forth in the DPH's public health manual for on-site sewage management systems and that established by the city, the larger lot size(s) established by the city shall control and take precedence. 
(4)  Fee schedule. A fee schedule for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-referenced state promulgated rules and regulations and local board of health enactments, including permit and inspection fees, has been established by the Forsyth County Board of Health, and is hereby adopted by the city. A copy of this fee schedule, including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, is on file at the Forsyth County Board of Health and on its website. 
(5)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any natural person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, to violate any of the above-identified rules and regulations, and/or to fail or refuse to pay any fee established by the Forsyth County Board of Health, for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees. 
(6)  Penalty. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, any person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, violating any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(b)  Each day during which a violation of any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this section shall constitute, and shall be considered, a separate offense. 
(c)  The enforcement and prosecution of this section shall be within the jurisdiction of municipal court of the city and the Forsyth County Board of Health, and their authorized designee(s) or agent(s), and all law enforcement personnel of the city. The city's municipal court shall have original jurisdiction upon any offense charged pursuant to this section. 
(7)  Equitable relief, injunction abatement. In addition to the rights and remedies set forth herein, or as otherwise authorized by law, the city and the Forsyth County Board of Health retain and reserve the right to seek equitable relief, injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action or proceeding to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Failure or refusal to pay any fee approved for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees, may result in suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued by the Forsyth County Board of Health. 
(8)  Prosecution. Violations of all DPH promulgated rales and regulations and all local board of health enactments identified herein may be prosecuted by an accusation or citation with or without a prosecuting attorney in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, and any successor statute; and the city authorizes the city attorney, the city solicitor or their designee to prosecute violations of this section, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-66, and any successor statute. 
( Ord. of 8-19-2014, §§ I—X ) 
Sec. 18-8. - General use of fireworks. 
(1)  Definitions. All terms utilized in this section shall bear the same definitions as those set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1, et seq. 
(2)  Prohibition of use of fireworks on property owned by the city, generally. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, corporation, association or partnership to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited any fireworks, including consumer fireworks, within any park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by or operated by, for, or under the custody and control of the city. 
(3)  Limited use of fireworks on property owned by the city. Subsection (2) of this section notwithstanding, the city, its agencies, authorities, and departments, shall have the authority to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited fireworks, including consumer fireworks, and shall additionally have the authority to contract with third parties to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited fireworks, including consumer fireworks, on property which is owned by or operated by, for, or under the custody and control of the city. No special use permit from the city shall be required in order for the city, its agencies, authorities and departments to engage in the activities covered by this paragraph. 
(4)  Violations. Violation of this section and its provisions shall be punishable as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of the city. 
( Ord. of 6-21-2016, §§ 1—4 ) 
Sec. 18-9. - Regulation of the sale of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Additional line of devices shall refer to the following four separate lines of devices: 
a.  Grinders; 
b.  Any storage devices with false or hidden doors or compartments commonly associated with tobacco, vaping, or drug use; 
c.  Weighing devices commonly associated with tobacco, vaping, or drug use; and 
d.  Torch lighters; 
(2)  Alternative nicotine product shall have the same definition as provided for said term in subsection 18-10(a)(2) of these ordinances; 
(3)  Applicant shall mean all persons who are required to sign an application for a license to sell non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia as set forth herein in subsection 18-9(b); 
(4)  City or City of Cumming shall mean the City of Cumming, Georgia; 
(5)  Director shall mean the director of the city department of planning and zoning; 
(6)  Non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia shall mean non-traditional instruments designed so to facilitate the smoking, consumption or ingestion of tobacco or nicotine in any form (such as bongs, hookah pipes, or faux jewelry, bracelets, or necklaces commonly associated with tobacco, vaping, or drug use, with one purpose of such items being the inhalation or ingestion of tobacco or drugs); provided, however, that the term "non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia" shall exclude alternative nicotine products, cigarette papers or wrappers, blunt wraps, traditional tobacco pipes (such as brand names Briar and Meerschaum), holders, cigarette rolling machines, or other products, devices, or substances used for the purpose of making tobacco cigarettes; 
(7)  Person shall mean and refer to any individual, natural person, partnership, firm, corporation, joint venture, proprietorship, business entity, association, agency, group, organization or group of persons or any other entity; 
(8)  Screened room shall mean a room separate from the public sales floor that is completely screened from view by the public such that persons entering into a regulated establishment shall not be able to observe any non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia except after entering the screened room; and 
(9)  Vaping shall have the same definition as provided for said term in subsection 18-10(a)(6) of these ordinances. 
(b)  Any person who offers for retail sale any item of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia shall, by June 1 of each year, apply to the city planning and zoning department for a non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia license and shall pay an annual license fee. For the permit year from July 1, 2018, through June 30, 2019, and for every year thereafter until modified by the mayor and council, the annual license fee shall be $2,000.00. Any person required to obtain a license to sell non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia and who also offers for sale any additional line of devices shall pay an additional annual license fee of $250.00 per additional line of devices. For the purposes of this section, every person who obtains such a license shall be referred to as a "licensee." All applications shall be fully completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a partnership, then each partner shall sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a corporation selling any item of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia, the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and operated in the city as a mutual benefit membership group, the individual being primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a private club, then each member of its governing body must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If the application is filed on behalf of a limited liability company, then each member of the limited liability company must sign the application in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(1)  All applications shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  A survey (dated no more than 180 days prior to submission of the application to the city), certified by a registered surveyor of this state, showing a scaled drawing of the premises, the location on the premises where the applicant desires to sell any item of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia, and the distance in linear feet measured from the front door of the premise where any non-traditional paraphernalia is to be sold, to the property line of the tract upon which is located the nearest church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college grounds or college campus building. 
The distance referred to in this subsection shall be measured in the same manner as required by the City of Cumming Alcohol Ordinance. 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
c.  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation and by-laws, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
d.  If the applicant is a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic or social club or corporation which is organized and operated in the city as a mutual benefit membership group, a copy of the charter or articles of incorporation, as well as sufficient proof of the organization's tax-exempt status shall accompany the application. 
e.  If the applicant is a private club, a copy of the articles of incorporation and by-laws, including amendments, shall accompany the application. 
f.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, a copy of the operating agreement. 
g.  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints for all persons required to sign the application to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as specified under Georgia law. Each person required to sign the application for an original license and/or renewal license, must authorize the city or its designated representatives to secure from any state, county, municipal or federal court, any police department and/or law enforcement agency his, her or its criminal history and civil history and further authorize the city, its officers and employees to use such information in determining whether or not a license for the sale of any item of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia will be issued to the applicant. Further, the applicant must authorize the city, its officers and employees to use such information in a public hearing if necessary, to determine whether or not the applicant's license should be denied, voided, cancelled and/or revoked. Each applicant waives any right or rights he, she or it may have under state or federal law, statute and/or court ruling to preclude the city from securing such criminal and/or civil history from any source and waives any right he, she or it may have to preclude the city from using such information publicly in determining whether the license will be issued to such applicant. 
h.  The application shall be accompanied by a certified or cashier's check for the full amount of the license fee combined with $175.00 for an investigative fee that may be paid with a credit or debit card for each individual fingerprinted. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded to the applicant. All other fees paid to the city which were submitted as part of the application, including, but not limited to the investigative fee and any employee application permit fee(s) shall be retained by the city. 
i.  The director may require any additional information and records he reasonably deems necessary. Failure to furnish such data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denying a license or revoking an issued license, and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
j.  A valid email address and a valid mailing address that can be used for serving documents upon the applicant. 
k.  Each applicant shall certify that applicant has read and understands this chapter and if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and shall require each of the licensee's employees to be familiar with this chapter. 
(2)  No license for the sale of any item of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia may be issued to an applicant under the following circumstances: 
a.  An applicant who is not at least 21 years old. 
b.  An applicant who has been convicted under any federal or state law of (1) a felony; or (2) any misdemeanor involving the usage, distribution, or possession of controlled substances, alcohol, or offenses involving moral turpitude within a five-year period immediately preceding application. For purposes of this subsection, a "conviction" shall include any plea of guilty or admission of guilt and subsequent sentence under the First Offender Act of O.C.G.A. §§ 42-8-60, 16-13-2 or 3-3-23.1(c), or any similar sentencing provision for first time offenders of any other state or of the United States. A plea of nolo contendre for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations, or the forfeiture of a bond (except traffic offenses) when charged with a crime is also considered a conviction under this chapter. 
c.  An applicant who has been held in civil or criminal contempt by any federal, state or local court if such citation indicates to the mayor and council that the applicant will not maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules, and regulations. 
d.  An applicant whom the director, or the mayor and council, determines, by reason of such applicant's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, records of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, is not likely to maintain the outlet for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or local laws. 
e.  An applicant who is not the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the holder of the lease thereon for the period covered by the license. The applicant for a license for the sale any item of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia, whether it be an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a nonprofit tax exempt civic, patriotic, or social club, limited liability company, or a private club, shall be the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the holder of the lease thereon for the period covered by the license. If the premises are leased, then the applicant shall provide information regarding the owner or landlord of the premise. 
f.  An applicant or family member (by blood or marriage) of an applicant who has had a license suspended or revoked, or an applicant who has had an application for a license denied under the provisions of this chapter within one year from the final date of such denial, suspension or revocation. For purposes of this provision, the final date of a denial of license shall be the date of written notice of such denial if the denial is not appealed; or, if the denial is appealed, the date of written notice of denial of the appeal. 
g.  An applicant who seeks to sell non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia in premises that are in or within 100 yards of any church building or in or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus, or in any premises for which there was a license to sell non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia that has been suspended or revoked until at least 12 months have passed since the suspension or revocation. 
(3)  At the time the applicant makes application for a license, a sign shall be posted and furnished by the Applicant and will be painted or printed in black letters one and one-half inches in height, against an yellow background, on a two-face, back-to-back surface of not less than 24 × 30 inches in space, and shall be placed by the applicant with the base of the sign not more than three feet from the ground on the most conspicuous part of the premises. The sign shall state clearly the nature and purpose of the application, and the name of the person, partnership, organization, corporation or private club making the application. 
(4)  Once an application, the accompanying documents described above, and the required investigative and license fees are filed with the city, the city police department shall conduct a criminal investigation of the application and produce a written criminal investigation report concerning all information relating to fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, and other matters pertaining to law enforcement. In the event the failure to obtain fingerprinting information from state and federal authorities delays completion of the written report, the police department may later supplement any fingerprinting information. If the fingerprinting information later reveals that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this chapter, this may be grounds for denying the application or revoking a license, despite an otherwise satisfactory written report. Upon production of the criminal investigation report, the chief of police or his designee shall make a determination as to compliance with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this section and section 18-10 as to the issues contained therein, and shall forward that determination to the director. The director shall cause the application forms and all accompanying documents required for consideration of the application to be assembled for review. 
(5)  If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this chapter, or if the director finds that the applicant fails to meet other qualifications outlined by this chapter, then the director shall inform the applicant, in writing, that the application has been denied, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his/her right to appeal to the mayor and council in accordance with subsection 18-9(c) of this chapter. If an applicant desires to appeal a denial by the director, the applicant must file a written request for an appeal hearing with the director within ten business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial by the director. 
(6)  Any application which the director determines to satisfy all the qualifications outlined in this chapter, including character requirements as contained in the criminal investigation report to the police department, shall be scheduled for review at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and council. In making its determination on whether to approve or deny the application, the mayor and council shall look to the qualifications set forth in this chapter and consider the public interest and welfare. The mayor and council shall have the sole discretion to grant or deny the application based on the information presented. A decision by the mayor and council shall be made at or within 30 days from the date of the city council meeting, unless the decision is postponed for purposes of the mayor and council obtaining additional information deemed necessary for consideration of the application. Notice of the decision by the mayor and council shall be mailed or emailed to the applicant. In the event the application is denied, written notification of such denial shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal as set forth in subsection 18-9(c). 
(7)  Upon approval by the mayor and council of the application for a license, the director shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. 
(c)  In the event the mayor and council deny the application for a license, suspend a license, or revoke a license, the applicant for a license or the licensee whose license was suspended or revoked may appeal to the mayor and council for reconsideration of the license denial, suspension or revocation by filing a written request for an appeal hearing with the director within ten business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial, suspension or revocation. Any such appeal hearing shall be conducted according to the procedures set forth in the subsection below. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal (accompanied by a fee of $250.00 made payable to the city), the director shall schedule a hearing before the mayor and council and provide written notice to the applicant of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. The director shall also state in the written notice in reasonable detail the factual basis for the denial of the application or the suspension or revocation of the license. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the director and the applicant and/or counsel for the applicant. 
(2)  The mayor and council shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the timely filed appeal of the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(3)  At the hearing, the director or his or her designee shall present the facts upon which the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license were based. After presentation of the case against the applicant, the applicant will have an opportunity to present his/her case, to rebut the allegations made against him/her, and present whatever defenses he/she has. The applicant shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the applicant, and to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(4)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the mayor and council shall determine whether the denial, revocation, or suspension of the license was warranted. The findings and conclusions of the mayor and council shall be forwarded to the director and it shall be the duty of the director to provide written notification to the adverse party of the actions of the mayor and council. 
(5)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be final unless appealed to the Superior Court of Forsyth County, Georgia, within 30 days of the director providing written notification to the adverse party of the decision. Appeal shall be by certiorari. 
(6)  For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served, when served by certified mail postage prepaid, or when served by email within three days after the date of deposit in the United States Mail. 
(d)  All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on June 30 of each year. An investigative fee of $175.00 shall be required for renewal applications pertaining to licenses that are to be issued for odd years in order to complete a criminal history report. In instances where a new, named licensee has been designated, a criminal history report and investigative fee shall be required regardless of the year. Persons holding a license for more than any one establishment and desiring to renew the license for such establishments shall pay only one investigative fee charge. Late applications will begin being processed at the time of receipt, but are not guaranteed renewal prior to July 1. If an application is submitted after July 31, a new application shall be required because renewal eligibility will not be considered past this date. 
(1)  For applications in which there are no changes of information and data contained in the original application, licensees shall file a renewal application accompanied by the requisite license fee with the city upon forms prescribed by the city on or before the second Monday in June of each year without penalty. Applications for renewal filed after the second Monday in June shall be subject to a late charge of ten percent of the license fee. 
(2)  Renewal applications must go before the mayor and council for review and approval. 
(3)  Applicants shall be required to file a new application if changes have occurred in the information and data furnished with the original application. Any changes to an applicant's criminal history will be subject to subsection (b) of section 18-9. 
(4)  Each application for renewal will show the date of the original application and that the applicant or applicants for the renewal are familiar with applicable Georgia laws and regulations and with the rules and ordinances of the city. The renewal application must be signed and sworn to by all applicants in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. The applicant will furnish all information required by the renewal application and failure to furnish the information will be grounds for denying the application. A false statement made on the renewal application will void the application and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for false swearing under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(5)  Each application for renewal of a license shall be approved or denied in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter. 
(e)  No license for the sale of a non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia shall be transferable, except upon the death of a licensee, at which time such license may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or lawful adult heir or heirs of such deceased person. If the legal representatives of such deceased licensee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter when the time arrives to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. Whenever a licensee doing business as a sole proprietorship loses its license as a result of the provision of this chapter, the licensee's successor in interest, upon filing an application for a new license, may continue to operate under the terms of the prior license until such time as the new application is approved or denied by the mayor and council; provided, however, no such continued operation shall be authorized until such time as a new application for license is made and the required fees paid to city to be forwarded to the director. Payment of fees shall not be required of a corporation whose predecessor in interest remains the named licensee under the new license. 
(f)  Any suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of a license by the mayor and council shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the mayor and council consistent with the procedures set for in subsection 18-9(c), above, and upon the following occurrences: 
(1)  Any licensed outlet that is found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to license revocation or suspension and shall also be subject to citation and prosecution as outlined in section 18-9. 
(2)  Every license issued by the city for the sale of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia shall be immediately revoked in case of bankruptcy, receivership, levy of legal process, or failure to promptly account for and pay the excise tax levied on the sale of nontraditional tobacco paraphernalia. 
(3)  Except as provided for transfers under subsection 18-9(f) above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed outlet shall cause the mayor and council to immediately revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(4)  All licensees must, within six months after the approval of said license, open for business the outlet referred to in the application for license, and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the said license. Failure to open the outlet and begin the sales referred to within the six-month period, shall cause the mayor and council to immediately revoke the license and no refund of any fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made. 
(5)  Any licensee who shall for a period of three consecutive months cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized in the said license, shall, after said three months period, cause the mayor and council to immediately revoke the license, and no refund of any fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made. 
(6)  A license may be immediately suspended or revoked by the mayor and council upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia, as is or may become applicable, the city license shall thereupon be immediately revoked. 
(8)  The mayor and council shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any outlet which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to the mayor and council. 
(9)  The mayor and council shall immediately revoke the license for any premises where non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(10)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee or licensed establishment to permit any person to engage in any activity on the premises for which the license is issued or within the place of business, which is in violation of the laws or regulations of any federal, state, county, or municipal governing authority or regulatory agency. A violation of this subsection shall subject the license to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(11)  An act or omission of a licensee which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or regulation, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, taxes, gambling, violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, or constitutes a crime of moral turpitude, shall subject the license to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(12)  Any license shall automatically expire on June 30 of each year unless renewed in accordance with this chapter. 
(g)  No licensee, employee of any licensee, or other person shall sell or permit to be sold any item of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia to any person who is a minor (i.e. has not reached the age of 18). 
(h)  Each licensee shall maintain their entire inventory of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia and any additional line of devices in a screened room and shall not allow minors to enter into the screened room nor sell any non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia to any minor. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to allow any item of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia or any additional line of devices to be in view of the public, except during actual sales transactions of such items. 
(i)  Sworn officers of the police department, the chief of police, the city code enforcement officer, the Forsyth County Sheriff, sworn officers of the Forsyth County Sheriff's Department, and the director (or his/her designee) shall have the authority to inspect the outlet and premises licensed under this chapter during the hours when the outlet is open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other municipal, county, state or federal officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
(j)  Any license for the sale of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia and any license for the sale of any additional line of devices shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business for which such license is issued. 
(k)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Any violation of this chapter, excluding sales to underage persons, shall subject the licensee to the following progressive actions by the mayor and council, except for those violations and occurrences set forth in subsection 18-9(f) above that provide for immediate suspension or revocation upon notice and hearing: 
a.  The first violation shall result in a warning or a license suspension for a period of up to 60 days. 
b.  The second violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall be punished as provided in section sections 1-10 and/or 1-11 and shall result in a license suspension for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than 90 days. 
c.  The third violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall result in license suspension. 
(2)  Sales to underage persons shall subject the licensee to the following progressive actions by the mayor and council: 
a.  The first violation shall result in a mandatory hearing before the mayor and council, a license suspension for a period of up to 60 days, and a minimum fine in the municipal court of $500.00. 
b.  The second violation within a consecutive 24-month period shall result in a mandatory hearing before the mayor and council, a license revocation, and a minimum fine in municipal court of $750.00. 
(3)  For any vendor that is licensed to sell alcohol in the city, any violation of section 18-9 that results in a conviction, license suspension, or license revocation, excluding the sale of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia to a minor, shall also count as a violation with respect to those actions or sanctions provided for in section 4-3 of the City of Cumming Ordinances governing alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" shall have the same meaning as provided in subsection 18-9(b)(2)b. 
(4)  For any vendor that is licensed to sell alcohol in the city, any conviction, license suspension, or license revocation resulting from the sale of nontraditional tobacco paraphernalia to a minor shall also count as a violation with respect to those actions or sanctions provided for in section 4-3 of the City of Cumming Ordinances governing alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" shall have the same meaning as provided in subsection 18-9(b)(2)b. 
(5)  For any license suspension of less than 30 days, the licensee will not be required to remove non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia from the premises, but shall be required to secure with lock and chain all non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia in an on-premises locked storage area out of view of the public. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the mayor and council from suspending or revoking a license or non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia permit for a period exceeding those periods identified in section 18-9 above, or from revoking the license or non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia sale permit if the mayor and council determine in their discretion that such action is necessary and in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the city. The suspension periods set forth above may be mitigated by the mayor and council upon presentation of evidence that the licensee established practices and procedures to prevent the violation from occurring and established procedures to properly train and supervise employees to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(6)  In addition to the available actions to be taken by the mayor and council, any licensee, employee of a licensee, individual, or other person who violate this chapter shall be subject to citation and prosecution by the police department. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation subject to a separate citation and penalties. The penalties may result in a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
( Ord. of 5-1-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ); Ord. of 6-5-2018, § 1 ) 
Sec. 18-10. - Prohibition on the use of alternative nicotine products. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms shall have the following definitions: 
(1)  Additional line of devices shall have the same definition as provided for said term in subsection 18-9(a)(1) of these ordinances; 
(2)  Alternative nicotine product shall mean an electronic product or device that employs an electronic heating element, power source, electronic circuit, battery, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means to produce a vapor that delivers nicotine to the person inhaling from the device, including e-cigarettes, e-cigars, and e-pipes, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, but not including e-hookahs or e-bongs; 
(3)  City or City of Cumming shall have the same definition as provided for said term in subsection 18-9(a)(4) of these ordinances; 
(4)  Non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia shall have the same definition as provided for said term in subsection 18-9(a)(6) of these ordinances; 
(5)  Vapejuice shall refer to any liquid that contains the compounds identified in subsection 18-10(c)(1) of these ordinances and can be used for vaping by means of an alternative nicotine product; and 
(6)  Vaping shall mean the ingestion or inhalation of vape juice from an alternative nicotine product. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Vaping is prohibited in all city government buildings but shall be allowed in the parking lot associated with or directly adjacent to any city government building. 
(2)  Vaping and smoking shall be prohibited in the premises of any building or premises that offers for sale any alternative nicotine product, non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia, or additional line of devices unless such building or premises has an operational dehumidifier to dispel any vapor produced by on-premises vaping. 
(3)  It shall be prohibited to mix or prepare vape juice on the premises of any building or establishment that offers alternative nicotine products for retail sales to consumers. 
(4)  No minors shall be allowed to enter onto the premises of any establishment that offers vape juice for sale unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(5)  No alternative nicotine products shall be sold in premises that are in or within 100 yards of any church building or in or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; provided, however, that any premises permitted to sell alternative nicotine products as of May 1, 2018, that is located within such proximity of any church building, school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus on May 1, 2018, shall be allowed to continue to sell alternative nicotine products in such premises provided that said permit holder remains in compliance with all other provisions of this section and the use of the premises to sell alternative nicotine products remains ongoing and continuous. If the sale of alternative nicotine products is discontinued, the grandfather entitlement under this paragraph shall be forfeit. 
(c)  Signage. 
(1)  All persons or entities selling vape juice in the city shall prominently post a sign on any premises where vape juice is sold stating that the only chemicals authorized to be used in such vape juice are: 
a.  Pharmaceutical grade vegetable glycerin, 
b.  Propylene glycol, 
c.  Nicotine, 
d.  Food-grade flavoring, and 
e.  Water. 
(2)  All persons or entities selling vape juice in the city shall prominently post a sign on any premises where vape juice is sold explaining how to safely use e-batteries for alternative nicotine products. 
(d)  Compliance with federal regulations. All persons or entities selling non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia, vape juice, or any additional line of devices in the city shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations, as amended, governing the sale and manufacture of non-traditional tobacco paraphernalia, vape juice, and additional lines of devices, and all such state and federal laws and regulations, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference into section 18-10 of this Code of Ordinances. Persons or entities who are registered to mix vape juice with the United States Food and Drug Administration shall be allowed to mix vape juice in the city and shall maintain documentation reflecting such registration at all times on the premises where vape juice is mixed. 
(e)  Permit required. 
(1)  No business whose primary product line for retail sale is alternative nicotine products, vape juice, or both, may offer such products for sale in the city without a permit. For purposes of this code section, "primary" shall mean that alternative nicotine products, vape juice, or both constitute at least 50 percent of the business's aggregate retail sales. Documentation reflecting a duly issued permit must be maintained at all times on the premises where such business offers for retail sale such alternative nicotine products, vape juice, or both. 
(2)  Fee. The applicant for a permit to sell vape juice shall pay a fee of $50.00 to the city's department of planning and zoning. 
(3)  Term. A permit issued under this article shall be valid during the period for which the permit holder operates the business. If the business is relocated, closes, or otherwise discontinues operation, the permit shall stand automatically revoked. 
(f)  Enforcement. Each person violating this section shall be punished as provided in sections 1-10 and/or 1-11 of these ordinances. Upon a violation of this ordinance, any permit issued under section 18-10(e) of these ordinances may be subject to revocation following a duly noticed hearing before the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 5-1-2018, § 1(Exh. A) ) 
Chapter 20 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; state, county, and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Penalty. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 20-2. - Placing of materials on streets, sidewalks. 
All merchants and property owners with property abutting the streets and sidewalks of the city are prohibited from showing, displaying or storing or for any other purpose any merchandise or personal property on the streets or sidewalks of the city. Excepted from this section shall be trash barrels or other trash containers and mechanical newspaper stands. All other merchandise, equipment, produce, supplies or other items are included within this prohibition. 
(Code 1998, § 58-1; Ord. of 11-2-1971) 
Secs. 20-3—20-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY USE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate public rights-of-way, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-23. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the utilities director of the city, or his or her designee. 
Emergency means a condition as determined in the discretion of the city or its officials that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Encroachment means any object, building, structure, pole, tower, line, pipe, cable, or thing located within a public right-of-way. The term "encroachment" also includes, but is not limited to, signs and sign support structures placed in and obstructions of rights-of-way. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, by easement or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water, storm water, sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 3; Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-24. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for regulations of public rights-of-way in accordance with the powers granted to the city via its Charter, O.C.G.A. §§ 32-4-92 and 32-6-1. It is further the purpose to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the public by proscribing regulations for the use of and work in public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 20-25. - Appeal. 
Persons aggrieved by a decision of the city pursuant to this article may appeal the decision to the mayor and council of the city, utilizing the appeal procedures outlined in the city zoning chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 9) 
Sec. 20-26. - Prohibitions and enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to encroach upon, utilize, or perform work in or upon any public right-of-way in violation of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to cause, create, or maintain any encroachment on any public right-of-way, except as may be specifically authorized by this article. 
(c)  No person or entity other than a utility company operating pursuant to a state or city franchise shall be permitted to cause, create or maintain any encroachment on any public right-of-way that is not directly adjacent to property owned or leased by that person or entity. 
(d)  Violations of this article shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-11. In addition, the city may require the removal of any unauthorized encroachment, or the city may itself undertake the removal of such encroachment and assess the costs therefor against the offender. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 4) 
Sec. 20-27. - Removal or relocation of encroachments. 
(a)  In addition to the removal provisions described in section 20-26, the city reserves all rights and privileges granted to it pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 32-4-92 and 32-6-171 to require removal or relocation of right-of-way encroachments. 
(b)  In the event that any such relocation or removal is performed by the city or its designees, the city reserves to itself all rights and privileges granted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-6-173 authorizing the city to assess the costs of such relocation or removal against the person or entity which owns or is otherwise responsible for the encroachment. 
(c)  The issuance of a permit pursuant to section 20-60 does not grant a property interest in any person or entity holding such a permit, nor does it grant a compensable right to utilize the public rights-of-way. All utilizations of public rights-of-way governed by this article are at the pleasure of the city, and may be revoked at any time in an emergency situation or upon 30 days' notice in a nonemergency situation. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 7) 
Sec. 20-28. - Working in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  To the extent reasonably possible, notification shall be given to the city street department prior to the initiation of any work within a public right-of-way in the city, whether or not a permit is required under this article. 
(b)  All work performed within public rights-of-way in the city, whether or not subject to the permit requirements of this article, shall be performed as follows: 
(1)  Prior to initiating any work within a public right-of-way which will require working below grade, the person or entity responsible for such work shall have all utilities located to avoid conflict with or interruption in utility service. 
(2)  All care shall be taken not to physically encroach into the portion of the right-of-way utilized by the public for travel purposes, whether for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  In the event it is necessary to encroach into the portion of the right-of-way utilized by the public for travel purposes, the person or entity performing the work shall be responsible for posting signage, erecting barricades, and providing other protective equipment to adequately safeguard the public and those performing the work. 
(4)  To the greatest extent possible, all work within public rights-of-way shall be performed during daylight hours. In the event it is necessary to conduct work outside of daylight hours the person or entity performing the work shall be required to provide adequate lighting to protect and adequately safeguard the public and those performing the work. 
(5)  At the conclusion of work within the public right-of-way, the person or entity responsible for the work shall restore the right-of-way to the condition in which it existed prior to the commencement of work, to include but not be limited to any necessary backfilling, grading, landscaping, planting and utility restoration. All public rights-of-way shall be left clean of surplus material and debris of every kind. 
(c)  The city streets department shall have the power to inspect any work performed in public rights-of-way within its corporate limits, and shall further have the power to declare the work as being not in conformance with this article or the plans submitted in support of any application to the city. Such deficiencies shall be communicated to the person or entity responsible for the work, who shall correct said deficiencies within ten days of receipt of notice from the city. Failure to correct the noted deficiencies shall be a violation of this article and may be enforced pursuant to section 20-26. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 8) 
Secs. 20-29—20-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 20-60. - Required. 
(a)  Any person or entity desiring to perform any work on or within any public rights-of-way including, but not limited to the installation, construction, modification, and/or removal of sidewalks, driveways, aprons, curbs, curbing, gutters, drainage structures, signs, utilities and their appurtenances, or other related work, shall make application to the city, obtain approval and a permit for such purpose before any work is commenced. 
(b)  The requirements, as stipulated in subsection (a) of this section, shall equally apply to any changes, alterations or additions to any existing installations on public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Scope of requirement. 
(1)  Nothing contained herein shall require any encroachment existing on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived to apply for and seek a permit for continued existence. However, modification or maintenance of such encroachments which alters the extent or nature of the encroachment shall require a permit. 
(2)  Nothing contained herein shall require a permit for the regular maintenance or repair of permitted encroachments or encroachments excepted from the permit requirement pursuant to this article. However, any maintenance or repair which alters the extent or nature of the encroachment shall require a permit. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 5) 
Sec. 20-61. - Application. 
(a)  The application for the permit required in section 20-60 shall be made in triplicate to the city streets department upon forms provided by that department. The streets department shall forward one copy of the application to the city utilities department and one copy to the city planning and zoning department for each department's review and comment. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the fee established in section 12-20. Such fee shall be changed only once in each year. 
(c)  Upon review of the application, the city shall have the authority to require plans and/or drawings to be submitted in support of the application sufficient to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed. 
(d)  Upon review of the application and prior to granting any permit under this division, the city shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Require the applicant to post a bond with a surety acceptable to the city conditioned to indemnify the city for loss or damage caused by or resulting from the work undertaken within the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Require the applicant to post a bond with a surety acceptable to the city conditioned to indemnify, protect and hold harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to persons or property caused by or resulting from the work undertaken within the public rights-of-way. 
(e)  The application for permit shall be reviewed and a decision thereon shall be issued within ten business days of receipt of the completed application of the city, or within ten business days from the receipt of any documentation required by the city, pursuant to this division. In reviewing the application and making a decision thereon, the city shall consider: 
(1)  The effect of the proposed work or encroachment on the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  The effect of the proposed work or encroachment on the safety and welfare of the public. 
(3)  Whether alternatives may ameliorate negative effects on the public rights-of-way or the safety of the public. 
(4)  Whether the proposed work or encroachment will conflict with or create problems with anticipated improvements to the public rights-of-way whether by the city or other governmental entities, or to future utility plans or the future land use map. 
(5)  Whether in light of the foregoing factors, the application should be granted, returned for amendment and alteration, or should be denied. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2009, § 6) 
Secs. 20-62—20-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - UTILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 20-70. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. In the event of a conflict between this division 3 and division 1 or 2 of this chapter, the provisions of this division 3 shall control. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-71. - Registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this division, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the utilities department within 90 days of the effective date of this division. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of registration. Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-72. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-73. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this ordinance and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city's municipal equivalents. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-74. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-75. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-76. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-77. - Blasting and mechanical excavation. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating equipment unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-78. - Repair and restoration. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-79. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-80. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined hereinabove. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-81. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Sec. 20-82. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's Codified Ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(c)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
( Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 1 ) 
Chapter 22 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Traffic signs and signal ratified. 
The adoption and existence of all traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings in place on the adoption date of this Code are ratified and confirmed. 
Sec. 22-2. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1998, § 66-32; Ord. of 3-18-1997, § 2) 
Sec. 22-3. - Adoption by reference. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-396, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 66-31; Ord. of 3-18-1997, § 1) 
_____
Sec. 22-4. - Speed zones established. 
The following speed zones are established based on a completed engineering and traffic investigation: 
List of Roadways  For  City of Cumming 
(1)  On-system. 

 
(2)  Off-system. 

 
Signs shall be erected and maintained by the city. It is unlawful to use radar on any state route, city street or county road not listed in this section. Any unauthorized changes made to this section will cause it to be void. 
***School Zone Hours Are Effective*** 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time—School days only 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time—School days only 
(Code 1998, § 66-66; Ord. of 5-20-1997; Amend. of 6-21-2011; Amend. of 4-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 22-5—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 46-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 22-26. - Restrictions for certain downtown spaces. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code enforcement officer means an employee appointed by the city administrator with authority to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Parking space means a space delineated between two parallel lines, the purpose for which is to indicate where a vehicle can be parked. 
Time limits means a maximum period of time that a vehicle may occupy any one parking space. 
Vehicle means any device or structure for transporting persons or things, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and other motorized forms of transportation. 
(b)  Application. Parking spaces located on the east side of West Courthouse Square, the parking lot at city hall and designated parking spaces at the Cumming Playhouse shall have a maximum time limit of two hours. Other parking areas and time limits may be added to this article by resolution of the council. Signage designating time limits in parking areas shall be erected by the street department. 
(c)  Penalties and enforcement. A vehicle parked in a designated parking space in violation of the time limits shall receive a citation issued by the code enforcement officer. The fine shall be $25.00 for each two-hour violation. The violator may pay the fine in the drop boxes erected by the city or at the police department. The violator may contest the citation at city municipal court. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2008, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 22-27. - Vehicle immobilization. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the immobilization of the vehicle of another by use of a boot or other like device within the city. The city finds that the immobilization or "booting" of vehicles belonging to others leads to unnecessary anger, conflict, drains public resources better spent elsewhere, and does not solve the problems created by improper use of parking spaces. It is further the purpose of this section to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the public because vehicle immobilization devices are unnecessary and not in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. In this section the term "vehicle immobilization device" or "boot" means any mechanical device that is designed or adapted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
(c)  Prohibitions, jurisdiction and enforcement. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to immobilize the vehicle of another by use of a vehicle immobilization device, boot or other like device. 
(2)  The police department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section. Citations shall be issued by the police department in accordance with set policy. 
(3)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear all cases related to alleged violation of this section. 
(4)  Violators of this section shall be liable for a monetary penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
(d)  Towing of vehicles excluded. Nothing in this section shall restrict or prohibit the towing of vehicles in accordance with the laws of the state and applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2010, §§ 2—5) 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Comprehensive plan. 
The partial update of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Cumming, GA, 2004—2025, adopted by resolution of the city, May 19, 2009, is hereby approved, along with accompanying maps, policies, goals, objectives, strategies and programs, as a general guide for the future growth, change and development in the city. 
(Code 1998, § 46-31; Ord. of 4-7-1992; Ord. of 5-17-2005(06), § 1) 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 
Sec. 101-2. - Comprehensive solid waste management plan. 
The Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan, adopted by resolution of the city, December 16, 2003, is hereby approved. 
(Code 1998, § 46-51; Ord. of 5-17-2005(06), § 2) 
State Law reference— Local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 
Sec. 101-3. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this subpart B. 
Sec. 101-4. - Status. 
While this subpart is a codification of the ordinances pertaining to planning, zoning, development and utilities, provisions in subpart A of this Code may also pertain to planning, zoning, development and utilities. The failure to include provisions in this subpart does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions. 
Secs. 101-5—101-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 101-27. - Creation and appointment. 
The planning commission for the city is hereby created. The planning commission shall be composed of three members appointed by the governing body in such a manner as hereinafter provided. Two members present shall be required to constitute a quorum. One such member shall be the annually elected chairman of the planning commission by the planning commission members, and the chairman shall not vote except in cases of a tie-vote between the other members. In cases of a tie-vote and the chairman excuses himself from voting, then such tie-vote shall constitute denial of said motion, application or action. All members appointed to the planning commission shall be residents of the city. The members shall serve concurrent terms of one year and shall serve until their successors are appointed. The compensation of the members of the planning commission shall be as established by the governing body. Any vacancy in the membership of the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of such vacancy in the same manner as the original appointment. The governing body may remove any member of the planning commission for due cause after written notice to such member and after a public hearing. Members of the planning commission shall appoint a secretary, or in lieu of such appointment, the zoning administrator shall serve as the secretary of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1301; Amend. of 3-17-2009, § 1301) 
Sec. 101-28. - Meetings and records. 
The planning commission shall meet at least one time each month at the call of the chairman, unless there is no business to transact, or at such other times as the planning commission may determine, and all such meetings shall be open to the public. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, or in lieu of such rules, the commission shall follow Robert's Rules of Order, latest edition. The planning commission shall keep record of its resolutions, recommendations, transactions, findings, and determinations, and all such records shall be public record and available for purchase by interested parties at a reasonable cost. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1302; Amend. of 3-17-2009, § 1302) 
Sec. 101-29. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall have the following functions, powers, and duties: 
(1)  Cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, regional, or local public or semi-public agencies or private individuals or corporations; expend such funds; and carry out such cooperative undertakings or contracts. 
(2)  Make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. Expenditures, exclusive of gifts to the planning commission or contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing body. 
(3)  Conduct surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare and recommend to the governing body any plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, order, convenience, aesthetics, prosperity or the general welfare of the City of Cumming. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend for adoption by the governing body zoning regulations and official zoning map, subdivision regulations and other such land use regulations; prepare and recommend for adoption by the governing body amendments to any of the land use regulations; and to review and make recommendations concerning applications for zoning map amendment, conditional use approvals, variances, or other such applications. 
(5)  Perform other planning functions and duties as may be required by the governing body. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1303; Amend. of 3-17-2009, § 1303) 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Building and housing, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 103-1. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 103-2. - Prohibited construction. 
(a)  The construction of any building of any type shall not be initiated within this city that: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(b)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes the replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(c)  An exemption to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, relative to the repair or renovation of an existing building, shall be made under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewerage system servicing water closets, faucets, or shower heads within such existing building; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewerage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the water closets, faucets, or shower heads required by this section were installed; 
(3)  When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  When units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(d)  Any person wanting to initiate construction under the exemption provisions provided for in subsection (c) of this section shall apply for the exemption in writing to the director of planning of the joint city and planning office located in the county courthouse. The request shall be attached to the building permit application. 
(Code 1998, § 18-66; Ord. of 9-18-1984) 
State Law reference— Water efficiency provisions required, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 
Secs. 103-3—103-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 103-21. - Adoption of technical codes. 
The following technical building and construction codes as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 are adopted by reference as the official codes of the city, and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: The mandatory and permissive codes designated in O.C.G.A. § 8-20-20(9)(B) are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1998, § 18-31; Ord. of 3-17-1992, § 1) 
Sec. 103-22. - Designation of officials. 
Within the codes adopted in section 103-21, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that code are concerned. 
(Code 1998, § 18-32; Ord. of 3-17-1992, § 3) 
Secs. 103-23—103-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE SAFETY AND PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 15, 1998 enacted provisions to be designated as §§ 18-150—18-172. In order to maintain the categorical standards of the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 103-50—103-72. Original section numbering has been maintained in the history notes following each section. 

Sec. 103-50. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Fire Safety and Prevention Ordinance" and may be cited and referred to as such. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-150) ) 
Sec. 103-51. - Scope. 
It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this article or inconsistent herewith. Where this article imposes greater restrictions upon persons, premises, or personal property than that imposed or required by other existing provisions of law or other ordinances, contracts, or deeds, the provisions of this article shall control. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-151) ) 
Sec. 103-52. - Adoption of state minimum fire safety standards. 
The City of Cumming, a Georgia municipal corporation (the "city"), by this article adopts the National Fire Codes Volume One through Volume Eleven, as amended by the rules and regulations of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, as promulgated pursuant to Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, including all subsequent revisions thereof, except as modified herein. These codes are also known as the state minimum fire safety standards. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-152) ) 
Sec. 103-53. - Enforcement of state minimum fire safety standards. 
The city, or its designated agent, is authorized to enforce the state minimum fire safety standards in all buildings and structures, except one- and two-family dwellings within the corporate limits of the city. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-153) ) 
Sec. 103-54. - Bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The city shall designate a person, persons, or other entity to act as a fire safety division, which shall be under the supervision of the city or its designated agent. The fire safety division contemplated by this section shall be authorized to enforce the standards adopted by this article. 
(b)  The Forsyth County Fire Marshal, or such other person designated by the mayor and council, and the fire safety division are hereby authorized by the city to enter and inspect any buildings or structures except one-family and two-family dwellings upon a showing that the public health or safety of the citizens of the city requires such entry and inspection. Such a showing, within the meaning of the authorization granted herein, shall be evidence necessary to effect a search of such structure without a warrant. Except under circumstances which require immediate entry or the exigencies of the situation demand otherwise, no entry or inspection under the authorization granted herein shall take place other than during normal business hours. Furthermore, the person making the entry authorized herein shall first make known his purpose and seek permission for the entry from the person in control of the premises sought to be investigated. Force shall not be used to effect an entry by members of the fire safety division unless there be imminent danger to the lives of the persons within the structure or danger to persons by the structure to be inspected. 
(c)  A report of the fire safely division shall be made semi-annually and transmitted to the mayor and council. Said report shall contain a report of all activities and inspections carried on within the corporate limits of the city and undertaken pursuant to this article. Said report may contain any further information deemed necessary by the fire safety division. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-154) ) 
Sec. 103-55. - Waivers and variances. 
Waivers and variances from the provisions of this article may be granted by the city, or its designated agent. Any application for a waiver or variance shall first be submitted to the Forsyth County Fire Marshal. The Forsyth County Fire Marshal shall then submit recommendations and observations along with the application for waiver or variance to the city, or its designated agent, for final action. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-155) ) 
Sec. 103-56. - Appeals from orders. 
The city, or its designated agent, shall review, consider and take action on any appeal from a recommendation of the Forsyth County Fire Marshal pertaining to this article. Any such appeal must be filed with the city, or its designated agent, within 30 days of the issuance of the order to be appealed. The record of any proceedings and any actions taken by a designated agent of the city may be reviewed by the mayor and council. The mayor and council will hold hearings and receive evidence if it so desires, or the mayor and council may act solely upon a review of the record submitted to it. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-156) ) 
Sec. 103-57. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed and be under water pressure, and ready for fire service prior to commencement of construction with combustible materials. Slab work can be completed prior to the installation of water mains and fire hydrants, but water must be available prior to any frame work commencement. Materials used in forming footings and foundations on grade shall be excepted from complying with this section. 
(b)  Commercial or industrial buildings equipped with automatic fire sprinklers or standpipe systems shall have a three-way type fire hydrant laced within 50 roadway feet of the fire department Siamese connections. 
(c)  Residential and multifamily occupancies equipped with automatic fire sprinklers or standpipe systems shall have a three-way type fire hydrant placed within 50 roadway feet of the fire department Siamese connections. 
(d)  A fire hydrant shall be installed within 500 roadway feet of any portion of the exterior of all buildings. 
(e)  Fire hydrants shall be installed within three feet of the curb with the steamer connection facing the roadway. 
(f)  No person shall obstruct the approach or visibility of any fire hydrant or fire department connection, closer than eight feet in any direction, parallel with street access. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-157) ) 
Sec. 103-58. - Electrical wires. 
The city, or its designated agent, or other person acting under the direction or the authority of the city or its designated agent, is authorized to cut any electric wire when the same is deemed necessary to control or prevent any condition hazardous to life or property from fire or explosion. No. cost to the city shall be incurred by any such action, nor shall the authority granted herein be construed or inferred to be an authorization or direction by the city for any person to assume any risk arising from the cutting of wires, nor as an assumption by the city for any liability for personal injury or property damage from any cutting of wires under this section. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-158) ) 
Sec. 103-59. - Accessibility for firefighting equipment. 
(a)  All buildings shall have an all-weather access drive. This all-weather drive shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width with no parking, or 30 feet in width with parking on one side, or 36 feet in width with parking on both sides, and have a turning radius of 42 feet at the backside curb line. 
(b)  Accessibility shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction. 
(c)  The city or its designee shall designate fire lanes as necessary to provide access for firefighting equipment to commercial and industrial buildings and multifamily dwellings. 
(d)  Every dead-end roadway more than 300 feet in length shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround acceptable to the fire department. 
(e)  Grades shall be no more than ten percent. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-159) ) 
Sec. 103-60. - Inspection of buildings and structures. 
(a)  The Forsyth County Fire Marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all existing buildings and structures which are covered by this article. 
(b)  The Forsyth County Fire Marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction work, required to have a construction permit, in all buildings and structures which are covered by this article, as follows: 
(1)  An 80-percent completion inspection and a 100-percent final inspection shall be obtained from the city or its designated agent prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued and the building or structure being occupied. 
(2)  In addition to the requirements specified above, projects consisting of multifamily residential buildings shall obtain a 50-percent inspection in order to ensure that the methods of seating penetrations within and throughout the walls can be inspected. 
(c)  Owners, their agents and/or designees, of all building structure, tenant spaces, and commercial sites which are covered by this article are required to submit plans and specifications for review and approval. All commercial site plans and sprinkler system plans are required to be submitted for review and approval. Generally, the same time constraints for review established by the city planning and zoning department shall apply to the review conducted by the fire safety division. 
(1)  Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the city or its designated agent. 
(2)  An owner, or designated agent, who shall build, construct, or erect any building or structure without approved plans or in violation of approved plans, from which no appeal has been taken, shall be guilty of a violation of an offense under this article. 
(d)  Upon any complaint submitted in writing to the city, or its designated agent, the city or its designated agent may enter in or upon any building, structure or premise between the hours of sunrise and sunset for the purpose of investigating the complaint. 
(e)  Upon the complaint of any person, the city or its designated agent may inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings or structures covered by this article whenever it is deemed necessary. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-160) ) 
Sec. 103-61. - Sprinklers in multifamily dwellings. 
All residential buildings located on real property zoned R-2 or R-3 containing more than two living units shall have an automatic extinguishing system installed according to NFPA 13, NFPA 13D, or NFPA 13R, whichever is appropriate. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-161) ) 
Sec. 103-62. - Collection of fees and issuance of permits and approvals. 
The city, or its designated agent, may collect, and is authorized to collect, fees for the review of plans and applications, inspections, and permits according to a fee schedule published by the city or its designated agent. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-162) ) 
Sec. 103-63. - Persons allowed in the vicinity of a fire. 
Whoever shall be and remain in the immediate vicinity of a fire, after being instructed to leave the premises, shall be guilty of an offense under this article, with the exception of the following: 
(a)  Any persons authorized by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-22; 
(b)  The mayor of the city, or any member of the mayor and council; 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer of the jurisdiction in which the fire occurs; 
(d)  Any owner of the premises upon which the fire occurs, or his agent; 
(e)  Any agent of an insuring insurance company; 
(f)  Any person ordered to scene of the fire by the chief of the Cumming Fire Department or the chief of the Forsyth County Fire Department; or 
(g)  Any other person authorized by the city or its designated agent. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-163) ) 
Sec. 103-64. - Crossing fire hose prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected fire hose of the Cumming Fire Department or the Forsyth County Fire Department when laid upon any street, roadway, or private driveway without the consent of the Cumming Fire Department or the Forsyth County Fire Department official in command. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in command or violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense under this section. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-164) ) 
Sec. 103-65. - Certain officers vested with police authority. 
The city, or the chief of police of the city, may designate officers to be sworn in as police officers of the city with powers to make arrests. The chief of police of the city shall have the authority to limit such powers of arrest as he may deem appropriate. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-165) ) 
Sec. 103-66. - Response to malfunctioning alarms. 
When emergency response to a malfunctioning or false alarm system exceeds two such responses in a 90-day period, a fee of $50.00 shall be levied for each additional incident. Fees shall be made payable to the city, or its designated agent. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-166) ) 
Sec. 103-67. - Unauthorized fires. 
Whoever shall cause fire to be set to any building, structure, automobile, truck, or any other vehicle without having first obtained the written permission of the city, or its designated agent, shall be guilty of an offense under this article. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-167) ) 
Sec. 103-68. - Obstructing a firehouse. 
Whoever shall willfully and knowingly place any obstruction of any nature in front of any firehouse shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-168) ) 
Sec. 103-69. - Prohibited outdoor burning. 
The city, or its designated agent, may prohibit any or all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-169) ) 
Sec. 103-70. - Obstructing a fire lane. 
Whoever shall park or otherwise leave an unattended vehicle or other obstruction in a fire lane, so designated by signs and/or painted curbing or other markings indicating that the same is a fire lane, shall be guilty of a violation under this article. Any vehicle obstructing a fire lane in violation of this section may be removed at the direction of the city or its designated agent or any law enforcement officer with the costs of such removal and subsequent storage to be borne solely by the owner of the vehicle and paid by such owner prior to the release of said vehicle. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-170) ) 
Sec. 103-71. - Violations of this article. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity which violates any provision of this article or the codes adopted herein by reference, or which fails to comply therewith or which shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant hereto, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved as specified herein, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the mayor and council, shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be deemed guilty of violating a municipal ordinance and such person, firm, corporation, or other entity may be punished accordingly. The imposition of criminal penalties shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a specified time. 
(b)  In addition to, or in lieu of, the above-referenced criminal penalties, any person, firm, corporation, or other entity violating the provisions of this article may be subject to the following: 
(1)  Upon due notice of such violation from the city, or its designated agent, be required to pay to the city a civil penalty of $100.00 for each such violation; 
(2)  A separate civil penalty for each day a violation occurs following notice of the violation from the city or its designated agent; 
(3)  Reimbursement to the city or its designated agent for reasonable attorney's fees, costs of litigation, costs of court, and other related expenses arising out of litigation involving this article or any provision thereof; 
(4)  Cease and desist orders bringing work which violates this article to an immediate stop until such violations are remedied to the satisfaction of the city or its designated agent; 
(5)  Revocation of permits or approvals by the city or its designated agent where there has been some false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact or facts contained in plans or other information upon which said plan and/or specification approval or permit was originally issued by the city or its designated agent; 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-171) ) 
Sec. 103-72. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforceable by the city or its designated agent, or any law enforcement officers authorized to enforce the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
( Ord. of 12-15-1998, § I(18-172) ) 
Chapter 105 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the zoning administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the flood hazard boundary map or the flood insurance rate, all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced or defined in this chapter. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 

Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the City of Cumming as a basis for the city's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the City of Cumming as a basis for the city's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which are necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 

Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose, unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood or 100-year future conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as, bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. The term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means, as corrected in 1929, it is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) and any subsequent improvements for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Cumming to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Source means U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, National Flood Insurance Program 1977, Elevated Residential Foundations, Reducing Flood Damage Through Building Design: A Guide Manual. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure, such as, the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as, clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The term "market value of the building" means the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the zoning administrator, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-4)) 
Sec. 105-2. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions provided in section 113-28. 
(b)  Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. 
(c)  The imposition of any penalties shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-77)) 
Sec. 105-3. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank, and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-2)) 
Sec. 105-4. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  When permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas, flood hazard areas can serve important purposes including stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, and wetland ecology. 
(c)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to private property; 
(3)  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(d)  It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-1)) 
Sec. 105-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-3)) 
Sec. 105-6. - Flood insurance studies adopted by reference. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the Flood Insurance Study, dated June 18, 1990, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas annexed into the city, the current effective flood insurance study and data for unincorporated Forsyth County, dated September 19, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-5)) 
Sec. 105-7. - Studies—For 100-year floodplains. 
Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include the following: 
(1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state, or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
(2)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency's approved methodology and approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-6)) 
Sec. 105-8. - Same—For future-conditions floodplains. 
Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
(1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state, or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
(2)  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency's approved methodology approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-7)) 
Sec. 105-9. - Repository of studies. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the office of the zoning administrator of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-8)) 
Sec. 105-10. - Relationship to other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-9)) 
Sec. 105-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-10)) 
Secs. 105-12—105-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-41. - Designation of administrator. 
The zoning administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-66)) 
Sec. 105-42. - Duties and responsibilities of administrator. 
(a)  Duties and responsibilities of the zoning administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in the zoning chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)  Maintain the records of all variance and appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(b)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-67)) 
Secs. 105-43—105-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATIONS 

Sec. 105-73. - Permit and compliance. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this division, including a permit where required, prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-68)) 
Sec. 105-74. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  Unless specifically excluded by this division, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the zoning administrator a permit application on a form provided by the zoning administrator for that purpose and all application specifications of this article. 
(b)  Applications shall consist of a plan, building and foundation design details, a description of the extent watercourses will be altered, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, state and federal permits (where required), and certifications, as more fully described in this division. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-69)) 
Sec. 105-75. - Floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall be drawn to an engineering scale and include the following items: 
(1)  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
(2)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
(3)  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
(4)  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
(5)  Proposed grading plan; 
(6)  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
(7)  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
(8)  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(9)  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-70)) 
Sec. 105-76. - Building and foundation design detail. 
The application for development approval shall include the following when a building or structure is to be constructed: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria specified in this division; 
(4)  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required by this division. 
(5)  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-71)) 
Sec. 105-77. - Alteration of watercourses. 
The application for development approval shall include a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-72)) 
Sec. 105-78. - Flood-related information requirements. 
The application for development approval shall include the following: 
(1)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any; 
(2)  Copies of work maps; 
(3)  Comparison of pre- and post development conditions base flood elevations; 
(4)  Future-conditions flood elevations; 
(5)  Flood protection elevations; 
(6)  Special flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Regulatory floodway widths; 
(8)  Flood profiles; and 
(9)  All other computations and other information similar to that presented in the flood insurance study. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-73)) 
Sec. 105-79. - State and federal permits. 
Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for any proposed development shall be submitted with the permit application for the proposed development. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-74)) 
Sec. 105-80. - Certifications. 
In addition to other certifications required by this division, the applicant shall provide the following signed certification: 
"All development activities will be done according to the approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan and any approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
____________  Applicant" 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-75)) 
Sec. 105-81. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the zoning administrator the certifications required by this section. 
(1)  Certificate. A certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. 
(2)  Surveyor or engineer certification. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. 
(3)  Engineer or architect certification of floodproofing. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(4)  Prior work. Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(5)  Deficiencies and stop work order. The zoning administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-76)) 
Secs. 105-82—105-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 105-106. - Relief by variance. 
A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the zoning administrator, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. The board of zoning appeals, as established in article II, division 2 of the zoning chapter shall hear and decide variances to the terms of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-21)) 
Sec. 105-107. - Variance application requirements. 
Requests for variances from the requirements of this division shall be submitted to the zoning administrator as specified in the zoning chapter for variances. In addition, any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the zoning administrator and board of zoning appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-22)) 
Sec. 105-108. - Variance procedures. 
All variance requests made under this division shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures for variances as specified in section 113-50, the city zoning ordinance, which requires notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-23)) 
Sec. 105-109. - Variances for historic structures and functionally dependent uses. 
(a)  Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(b)  Functionally dependent uses. Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-24)) 
Sec. 105-110. - Certain variances prohibited. 
(a)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(b)  Variances shall not be issued after the fact. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-25)) 
Sec. 105-111. - Criteria to consider in granting variances. 
The provisions of this division are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards through the variance process must be weighed carefully. In reviewing variance requests, the zoning administrator and board of zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this division. A variance shall be issued only when the following requirements are met: 
(1)  There is a finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  There is a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; 
(3)  There is a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance; 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-26)) 
Sec. 105-112. - Conditional approval of variances. 
Upon consideration of variance criteria and the purposes of this division, the zoning administrator and the board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as deemed necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-27)) 
Sec. 105-113. - Notice to applicant when variances are granted. 
Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-28)) 
Sec. 105-114. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the zoning administrator shall have the right to appeal such decision to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with procedures for the appeal of administrative decisions as specified in the zoning chapter. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision by petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of the date of the decision as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-29); Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 2 ) 
Secs. 105-115—105-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 105-142. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied A zones, as identified in the flood insurance study, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the zoning administrator. If future-conditions elevation data are not available from the zoning administrator or another acceptable source specified in this article, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the zoning administrator. 
(c)  If a proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-conditions elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-91)) 
Sec. 105-143. - Floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the flood insurance study or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the zoning administrator. If floodway data are not available from the zoning administrator or another acceptable source specified in this article, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-92)) 
Sec. 105-144. - Limitations regarding future-conditions floodplain. 
No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-93)) 
Sec. 105-145. - Standards for development within future-conditions floodplain. 
Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under this article, if permitted, shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-conditions flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel, unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of this article; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the zoning administrator using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-94)) 
Sec. 105-146. - Engineering study required for floodplain encroachments. 
(a)  An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of this article shall otherwise apply. 
(b)  This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. 
(c)  This information shall be submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-95)) 
Sec. 105-147. - Engineering study specifications. 
An engineering study required for floodplain encroachments shall include the following: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the zoning administrator. Cross sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating flood insurance study results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-96)) 
Sec. 105-148. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as "floodway." A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Prohibited. Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in this section. 
(2)  Exception. Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways, and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(3)  Revision of floodway boundaries. If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the zoning administrator until an affirmative Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-97)) 
Sec. 105-149. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city through the zoning administrator may direct the property owner (at no cost to city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain, if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-98)) 
Sec. 105-150. - General standards for all areas of special flood hazard. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Future-conditions floodplain. New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of this article have been met; 
(2)  Anchoring. New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  Damage-resistant materials. New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  Methods and practices. New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Heating and air. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  Water supply. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  Sanitary sewage systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(9)  On-site disposal systems. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-90)) 
Sec. 105-151. - Areas below elevated buildings. 
(a)  Flood resistance. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(b)  Certification or minimum criteria. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(c)  Use limits. So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-100)) 
Sec. 105-152. - Nonconformities. 
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-101)) 
Sec. 105-153. - Residential buildings—New construction. 
(a)  Scope; prohibition. This section applies to residential buildings. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this article have been met. 
(b)  Elevation of lowest floor. If all of the requirements of this article have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(c)  Unimpeded movement of floodwaters. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-102)) 
Sec. 105-154. - Same—Substantial improvement. 
(a)  Scope; elevation of lowest floor. This section applies to residential structures. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Openings below elevated structures. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-103)) 
Sec. 105-155. - Nonresidential structures—New construction. 
(a)  Scope; prohibition. This section applies to nonresidential structures. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this article have been met. 
(b)  Elevation of lowest floor. New construction that has met all of the requirements of this article may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
(c)  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-104)) 
Sec. 105-156. - Same—Substantial improvement. 
(a)  Scope; floodproofing may be authorized. This section applies to nonresidential structures. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the zoning administrator to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(b)  Specification for floodproofing. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
(c)  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-105)) 
Sec. 105-157. - Accessory structures and facilities. 
Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities, and other similar nonhabitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with this article and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-106)) 
Sec. 105-158. - Recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)  Be temporary. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(2)  Meet requirements for substantial improvement. Meet all the requirements for substantial improvement of residential buildings, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-107)) 
Sec. 105-159. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  Prohibition. New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this article have been met. 
(b)  Elevation of lowest floor. Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(c)  Anchoring. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-108)) 
Sec. 105-160. - Elevation of residential buildings and manufactured homes adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-109)) 
Sec. 105-161. - Elevation of nonresidential buildings adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-110)) 
Sec. 105-162. - Single-lot residential development in A zones. 
For a residential single-lot development, not part of a subdivision, that has areas of special flood hazard where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), the zoning administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments. No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Elevation of lowest floor. In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(3)  Openings below elevated structures. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-111)) 
Sec. 105-163. - Substantial improvements of residential structures in AO zones. 
(a)  Described. Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. 
(b)  Elevation of lowest floor. All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(c)  Openings below elevated structures. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this article. 
(d)  Drainage. Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-112)) 
Sec. 105-164. - Substantial improvements of nonresidential structures in AO zones. 
(a)  Floodproofing permitted. Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(b)  Standards. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
(c)  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice. 
(d)  Drainage. Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-113)) 
Sec. 105-165. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with this article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 8-15-2006(01), § 1(38-114)) 
Chapter 107 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 18, 2017 , amended ch. 107 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 107 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 107-1—107-7, 107-31—107-38, 107-51—107-61, 107-81—107-83, 107-101—107-105, and derived from ordinances adopted June 15, 2010; and April 19, 2016 . 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 107-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known and may be cited as the "City of Cumming Soil Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Ephemeral stream: A stream: 
(a)  That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; 
(b)  That has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; 
(c)  For which ground water is not a source of water; and 
(d)  For which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements of this chapter. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop of perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices exempted from the requirements of this chapter. 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The city council of the city (the governing authority of the municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a)). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Upper Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication, "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3. 
Sec. 107-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this chapter; For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b), and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 107-23 of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall he submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Secs. 107-4—107-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL USING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

Sec. 107-21. - General applicability. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices, The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-22. - Minimum requirements/best management practices; proper design a defense. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this section of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections 107-23(15), (16), and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-23. - Reference to state general permit and erosion control manual. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 107-22(2) of this chapter; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-2(6), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-2, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. 12-5, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in [EPD Rule] 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-24. - Stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements. 
Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 107-22, and 107-23 of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-25. - Land-disturbing activity resulting in injury to the property of another. 
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-26. - Incorporation of "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". 
Said "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-27. - Reference to stream buffer requirements of other city ordinances. 
There are stream buffer requirements imposed by the city in other ordinances which are more restrictive than required by this chapter. The city has adopted a watershed protection ordinance adopted pursuant to mandate of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District and its statutory model ordinance for stream buffers which requires 50-foot wide stream buffers. The city has also adopted stream buffer and impervious surface setbacks from certain streams within the Big Creek small water supply watershed adopted pursuant to Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria for Water Supply Watersheds (Rule 391-3-16-01) (see article XI of the city zoning ordinance, Section 1107, "Requirements for Small Water Supply Watersheds"). Applicants for land-disturbance permits are responsible for ensuring that those stream buffer and impervious setback provisions are met, as applicable. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Secs. 107-28—107-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION AND PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Permits O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7-et seq. 

Sec. 107-41. - In general. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-42. - Permit required prior to land-disturbing activity. 
(1) No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first making application for and obtaining a permit from the department of planning and zoning to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2) The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Cumming Department of Planning and Zoning and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 107-44 of this chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 107-22, and 107-23 of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3) In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4) Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 107-23(15), (16), and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5) If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6) The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-43. - Certification of site visit. 
All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-44. - Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
(2)  The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances, and state laws. 
(3)  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of this chapter will be met. 
(4)  Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(5)  Data required for site plans shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-45. - Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsection 107-23(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 107-42(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-45.1. - Fees. 
(1)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. 
(2)  All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. 
(3)  In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-46. - Bond. 
(1)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the land disturbance permit. 
(2)  If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-47. - Submission of permit application and plans to EPD. 
The application for a permit shall be submitted to EPD and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in this chapter. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-48. - Referral of application to district for review. 
(1)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. 
(2)  The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. 
(3)  No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required from the director from EPD have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required by this chapter, has been obtained. 
(4)  The review required by the district as specified in this section will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-49. - Requirements for permit issuance. 
No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-50. - Violation a basis for denial of permit. 
If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-51. - Action by local issuing authority. 
(1)  The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(2)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained where necessary, and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. 
(3)  The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(4)  If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Secs. 107-52—107-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERMITTEES; INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 107-71. - Responsibilities of permittees. 
(1)  Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. 
(2)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(3)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-72. - Education and certification. 
(1)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(3)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-73. - Inspection. 
(1)  The director of planning and zoning of the city or designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(3)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations, as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(4)  The city and the environmental protection division shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(5)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(6)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(7)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority, If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Secs. 107-74—107-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 107-81. - Violation. 
(1)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This section shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(2)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-82. - Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbance permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person, in addition to other enforcement activities authorized in this chapter, shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-83. - Failure to comply; written notice to comply. 
If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined in this chapter has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-84. - Written warning and stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order. 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
State Law reference— Stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12. 
Sec. 107-85. - Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. 
(1)  A land-disturbance permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(2)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Cumming City Council within 15 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(3)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal via writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Forsyth County 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-86. - Bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 107-42(6). 
The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-87. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in the city's Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation, Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Secs. 107-88—107-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 107-91. - Effectivity. 
The provisions codified in this chapter shall become effective on the 18th day of April, 2017. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-92. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-93. - Liability. 
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-94. - Injury to property not proof or presumption of violation. 
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Sec. 107-95. - Saving provision. 
No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. of 4-18-2017, § 2 ) 
Chapter 109 - SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 109-1. - Short title. 
These regulations are known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land Development Regulations of the City of Cumming." 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 101) 
Sec. 109-2. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all terms used in these regulations have their customary dictionary definition. Terms used in the present tense include the future; terms in the singular include the plural number and terms in the plural include the singular; the term "building" includes the term "structure;" the term "shall" is mandatory and not directory. The term "may" is permissive. 
Administrative officer means the director of planning and zoning of the City of Cumming, or his authorized representative. 
Alley means a public or private thoroughfare that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 

Appeal means a request for a review an administrative official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or an action taken by an administrative official in the application or enforcement of this chapter. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals or property of any kind, including tents, awnings, or vehicles used for purposes of a building. 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the buildings, including any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements shall be observed for those areas adjacent to street rights-of-way. 
Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the mayor and council and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs, ditches, or pavement/improvement ends of such street, or such midway line extended. 
City engineer. The term "city engineer" shall be interpreted broadly, appropriate to its context, to include staff of the City of Cumming Planning and Zoning Department with regard to development permitting and subdivision plat approval, the director of utilities for the City of Cumming with regard to water, sewer, and stormwater permitting and approval, and any consulting city engineer employed by the City of Cumming with respect to the functions of this chapter. 
Comprehensive plan means those coordinated plans, or portions thereof, which have been prepared by or for the mayor and council for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround. 
Cul-de-sac, temporary, means a nonpermanent vehicular turnaround located at the termination of a street. 
Curb cut means a provision for vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting street. 
Deceleration lane means an added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the city engineer, that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
Dedication plat means a plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
Development means any manmade change of improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. 
Easement means a nonpossessory interest in land; a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation, or persons of a portion of land for a specified purpose. 
Escrow account means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits either cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face-value specified by the city engineer to cover the costs of required improvements. 
Homeowners' association means an organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
Land disturbing activity means: 
(1)  Any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; 
(2)  Clearing of vegetation; 
(3)  Any other alteration of land which causes land and stream bank erosion, siltation or water pollution; and 
(4)  Any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure. 
Letter of credit means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the city. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both, intended to be devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use and having principal frontage on a public street or an approved private street. In determining the area and dimension of a lot, no part of the right-of-way may be included. 

Types of Lots
(1)  Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street rights-of-way. 
(2)  Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at the intersection. 
(3)  Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
(4)  Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot which has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
(5)  Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public street is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
(6)  Lot, frontage, means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
(7)  Lot of record means a parcel of land within the city limits which was properly platted and recorded in the Clerk of Forsyth County's Plat and Deed Records as of January 21, 1986, or which has been lawfully subdivided in accordance this chapter and subdivision regulations since January 21, 1986, or which was lawfully subdivided prior to annexation into the city limits. 
(8)  Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required building line. 
Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as, a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting streets. 
Performance bond means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the city engineer to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the city. The city may call in the performance bond in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
Plat, final, means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information, certification, and all other elements and requirements set forth in this chapter, prepared for filing for record with the Clerk of the Forsyth County Superior Court. 
Plat, preliminary, means a drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its general design. 
Professional engineer means an engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
Professional surveyor means a surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of land surveying. 
Protective covenants means contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Reservation means a method of holding land for future public use by showing proposed public areas on a subdivision plat. 
Reserve strip means a strip of land across the end of, or along the edge of, a street, alley, or lot for the purpose of controlling access which is reserved or held until future street extension or widening. 
Right-of-way means that area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple title by the mayor and council or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Shade tree means a tree in a public place, street right-of-way, or special easement, planted to provide canopy that will obscure the sun and heat from the ground. 
Sidewalk means a hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a public road. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(1)  Street, arterial, means, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
(2)  Street, collector, means, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within commercial and industrial areas. 
(3)  Street, private, means a road or street that has not been accepted for maintenance by the city and that is not owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or another public entity. 
(4)  Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles. 
Subdivision means the division of a parcel or tract of land into two or more lots for the purposes of creation of lots for development, the rearrangement of existing lot lines, or for the purpose of transfer of ownership. 
Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of these regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, art. II; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 1) 
Sec. 109-3. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director or the local issuing authority issued, as provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 903; Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § V) 
Sec. 109-4. - Purpose and intent. 
These rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city; 
(2)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(3)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement plans of the city; 
(4)  To ensure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments, especially for the purposes of ensuring that all building lots will be accessible to firefighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles; 
(5)  To ensure the provision of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
(6)  To ensure the adequate provision of water supply, stormwater drainage, sanitation, lighting, and other necessary improvements; 
(7)  To ensure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider and land developer; 
(8)  To ensure, in general, the wise development of new land areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the community; 
(9)  To ensure the accurate description of property and adequate and proper identification of property in public records; 
(10)  To help conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of the community; 
(11)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems which develop when streets and lots are laid out without proper consideration given to various public purposes; 
(12)  To protect lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 102) 
Sec. 109-5. - Authority. 
These regulations are adopted pursuant to powers vested in cities by the state constitution, home rule powers, state administrative rules for the adoption and implementation of comprehensive plans, and the protection of vital areas of the state. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 103) 
Sec. 109-6. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits of the city, as exist at the time this chapter is adopted, and all lands subsequently annexed into said corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 303) 
Sec. 109-7. - Subdivision of land. 
No person shall subdivide land except in accordance with this chapter. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider, by deed or map, to sell, transfer, agree to sell, offer at public auction, negotiate to sell or subdivide any land until a preliminary plat, if required, and final plat have been approved by the administrative officer and final plat recorded in accordance with this chapter. Such restriction applies to lands subdivided for nonresidential as well as residential uses. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from this chapter or from the penalties established herein. The city through its attorney or other designated official may enjoin such transfer, sale, or agreement by appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 304) 
Sec. 109-8. - Public streets and lands. 
No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for any other purpose improvements unless such are constructed in accordance with the specifications of this chapter and accepted by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 305) 
Sec. 109-9. - Lots must comply with the zoning regulations. 
No person shall subdivide land, and the administrative officer shall not approve any subdivision of land, unless the lots created pursuant to said subdivision meet or exceed all applicable requirements of the zoning chapter of the city, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 306) 
Sec. 109-10. - Preliminary plat, development permit, and land development plans required. 
No person shall commence development, land disturbing activity, or construction of any improvements on any lot or land hereafter subdivided, and no development permit shall be issued for such improvements, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat of such land if required by this chapter and the approval of a development permit if required by the zoning chapter, as may be amended from time to time, nor prior to approval of construction plans and engineering plans for said improvements being submitted and approved by the administrative officer and the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 307) 
Sec. 109-11. - Building permit required prior to construction. 
No building permit shall be issued for a building or structure located in a subdivision created subsequent to adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless a final plat if required has been approved by the administrative officer and recorded in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 308) 
Sec. 109-12. - Land is one tract until subdivided. 
Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval and been properly recorded, the land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one tract, or as otherwise legally recorded. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 309) 
Sec. 109-13. - Approval for plat recording required. 
No subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded in the Superior Court of Forsyth County, unless such plat has been approved for recording by the administrative officer. The clerk of the Superior Court of Forsyth County shall not record a plat of a subdivision, whether evidenced as a plat or as an attachment to a deed, unless such plat is a final plat approved by the administrative officer or his designated representative and contains the administrative officer's signature thereon. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 310) 
Sec. 109-14. - Exemptions from plat approval. 
The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
(2)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
(3)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds (but not for sale) for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
(4)  The creation of leaseholds (but not for sale) for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
(5)  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the city to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable zoning chapter provisions regarding lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 311) 
Sec. 109-15. - Exemption from plan approval. 
The land development plan requirements specified in article III of this chapter shall not apply to any individual lot which has already been platted in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, or any lot of record, when such lawfully existing lot is to be developed for a detached, single-family, fee-simple residence or a two-family dwelling (duplex). Specifically, a development permit and the submission of land development plans shall not be required for such lots and uses. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 312) 
Sec. 109-16. - Reference to state and federal land subdivision laws. 
The subdivision of land within the city shall comply, as applicable, with the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act (15 USC 1701 et seq.) and with the Georgia Land Sales Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq.). All subdivision plats shall also comply with applicable state laws regarding accuracy and content of all such subdivision plats. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 313) 
Secs. 109-17—109-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 109-35. - Delegation of authority to administrative officer. 
The mayor and council hereby delegates to the administrative officer the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove exemption plats, preliminary plats, final plats, lot combination plats, boundary line adjustments, and dedication plats; provided, however, such delegation does not authorize the administrative officer to accept public improvements for the mayor and council. The administrative officer is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove land development and construction plans. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 301) 
Sec. 109-36. - Delegation of authority to city engineer. 
The city engineer is vested with the authority to require and approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval of preliminary plats, final plats, land development applications, and subdivision and land development improvements. The city engineer shall require improvement guarantees for public improvements as specified in this chapter. The city engineer is further authorized to promulgate additional technical standards and construction specifications for land development improvements not already specified by this chapter or the zoning chapter, including but not limited to water systems, sanitary sewer systems, streets, storm drainage systems, utilities, driveways, curb cuts, and parking lots. The technical standards and construction specifications shall specifically include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  City of Cumming, Department of Utilities, Water Pollution Control Division, Manual of Technical Specifications for Wastewater Pumping Stations. 
(2)  City of Cumming, Department of Utilities, Water Pollution Control Division, Manual of Technical Specifications and Construction Standard Details for Wastewater Collection Systems. 
(3)  City of Cumming, Department of Utilities, Distribution and Collection Division, Manual of Technical Specifications and Construction Standard Details for Water Distribution System. 
(4)  City of Cumming, Department of Utilities, Distribution and Collection Division, Manual of Technical Specifications and Construction Standard Details for Potable Water Booster Stations. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 302; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 2) 
Sec. 109-37. - Administration and interpretation. 
The administrative officer shall administer and interpret the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 901) 
Sec. 109-38. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the administrative officer or city engineer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter may file an appeal to the board of appeals in accordance with article II of the zoning chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 902) 
Sec. 109-39. - Variances. 
(a)  Authorized. The board of zoning appeals is authorized to, upon application, consider and approve, conditionally approve, or deny variances to the provisions of this chapter. When an application for variance is filed pursuant to this section, it shall require advertisement of notice and public hearing as specified in sections 113-50, 113-52, and article II of the zoning chapter. 
(b)  Staff findings and recommendations. For each variance application filed pursuant to this article, the administrative officer and director of utilities shall prepare a report of findings and recommendations to be considered by the planning commission and board of zoning appeals prior to action on the application. 
(c)  Criteria for granting variances. No variance authorized under this article shall be approved until or unless findings have been made by the administrative officer or the board of zoning appeals, whichever has jurisdiction, that all of the following conditions exist. The absence of any one of the conditions shall be grounds for denial of the application for variance. 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other similarly situated land; 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners with similarly situated land; 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other similarly situated properties; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and other city ordinances regulating development practices and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or general welfare in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value; 
(5)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; and 
(6)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal development of the land. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 10(1001)—(1003)) 
Secs. 109-40—109-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS AND PLAN APPROVAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-67. - Special review of subdivisions along state routes. 
No subdivision plat containing land which abuts a state route shall be approved until such plat has been submitted to and approved by the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 314) 
_____
Sec. 109-68. - Application requirements. 
The following table outlines application requirements for plat and plan approval: 

 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, table 4.1; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 3) 
Sec. 109-69. - Plat and plan specifications. 
The following table outlines specifications for plat and plan approval: 

 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, table 4.2) 
_____
Sec. 109-70. - Preapplication conference. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land, or a land development, is proposed to be made, the subdivider or land developer is encouraged (but not required) to consult early and informally with the administrative officer. The subdivider or land developer may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity, and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision or land development. This preapplication conference is intended to permit an early evaluation of the subdivider's or land developer's intentions and coordination with the comprehensive plan of the city, and to provide the subdivider or land developer with the necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review, and no formal application shall be required. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 401) 
Secs. 109-71—109-98. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 109-99. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions through the submittal of a preliminary plat. Any subdivision involving the dedication of a public street or public land, and any subdivision involving a new private street, shall require the submission of a preliminary plat to the administrative officer for review and approval by the administrative officer and city engineer. 
(b)  Applications for preliminary plat approval shall meet the requirements of section 109-68. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 402) 
Sec. 109-100. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
When a preliminary plat is required, it shall conform to the requirements of section 109-69; provided, however, that the administrative officer may waive individual information requirements established in this section where, in his opinion, said information is not essential to the review process. If the complete preliminary plat or set of land development plans cannot be shown on one sheet at this size and scale, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 403) 
Sec. 109-101. - Transmittal of preliminary plat to review agencies. 
The administrative officer shall transmit for review and comment a copy of the preliminary plat to the city engineer and, when involving property abutting a state route, to the state department of transportation. At his discretion, the administrative officer may transmit for review and comment a copy of the plat to applicable internal and external review agencies, such as, but not limited to: the city attorney, the city fire chief, the city building inspector, the county health department, the state department of natural resources, and any other agency that may have an interest in or jurisdiction over the proposed subdivision. The administrative officer shall consider such comments and may condition the preliminary plat to be consistent with said comments. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 404) 
Sec. 109-102. - Action on the preliminary plat. 
Within 15 working days of receipt of the completed application for preliminary plat, the administrative officer shall either approve the plat as submitted and notify the applicant in writing thereof, approve the plat with conditions, or disapprove the plat along with reasons for said disapproval made in writing to the applicant. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of land development plans or the final plat; rather, it shall constitute approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat to be used as a guide for the preparation of land development regulations and the final plat. Preliminary plat approval shall continue in effect for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 405) 
Sec. 109-103. - Amendments to preliminary plat approval. 
The administrative officer, in consultation with the city engineer when engineering considerations are involved, is authorized to approve amendments to preliminary plats. The application requirements and procedures for amending preliminary plats shall be the same as specified for preliminary plat applications. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 406) 
Secs. 109-104—109-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 

Sec. 109-135. - Submittal of land development plans. 
Following approval of the preliminary plat for a land subdivision, or if subdivision is not proposed, upon proposing a land development, the subdivider or land developer shall submit an application for land development approval per the requirements of section 109-68 for land development plans. The land development plans shall at minimum include information specified in section 109-69 for land development plans. The plans shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Utility plans providing information regarding the location, size, length and type of all water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage improvements showing their minor structures, appendages and connections with existing systems, and the approximate location of service lines from the lots to the proposed utility lines. Such plans shall at minimum meet the requirements of chapter 111, pertaining to utilities, as adopted and as may be amended from time to time, applicable specifications adopted by the city department of utilities which may be amended from time to time, and any applicable requirements of this article. 
(2)  Street plans providing information as follows: 
a.  Street profiles and cross sections as required by the city engineer; 
b.  Type of sub-base, type of paving base, type curb and gutter; 
c.  Type street paving; and 
d.  Type improvements within the street right-of-way outside of the paved area. 
(3)  Grading plans and soil sedimentation and erosion control plans, which shall at minimum meet the requirements of chapter 10, pertaining to environment and natural resources, chapter 107, pertaining to soil erosion and sedimentation control, as adopted or as may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  Plans, reports, and other data relative to stormwater management required by chapter 111, pertaining to utilities, as adopted or as may be amended from time to time. 
(5)  In addition to utility, street, grading and erosion control, and stormwater management plans, the administrative officer and/or city engineer may require a hydrological study or other engineering studies as may be necessary, depending upon the scope and extent of the development project. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 407; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 4) 
Sec. 109-136. - Review and approval of plans. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed land development plans by the administrative officer, he shall review them for compliance with this article, the zoning chapter, and any other local regulations under his review responsibility. The administrative officer shall have ten working days to certify compliance with planning and zoning requirements and nonengineering aspects of the land development plans. Upon such certification of compliance, the administrative officer shall stamp them with the date approved and forward all three sets of plans to the city engineer. The city engineer shall have 15 working days to review and approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans. If disapproved, the city engineer shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for said disapproval. If approved or conditionally approved, the city engineer shall provide his signature on said approved plans indicating said approval, retain one copy of such plans for his records, return one copy to the applicant, and submit one copy to the administrative officer. 
(b)  Upon final approval of plans by the city engineer, the applicant shall provide in addition to the printed copies required by this section, all plan information in digital format compatible with AutoCAD (.dwg. or .dxt) or ArcView (shape files or coverages), which shall be properly registered and/or coordinated with global positioning system (GPS), state plane coordinates, or other registration and coordination system approved by the planning and zoning director. This requirement to file digital information shall specifically include but not be limited to final plat and as-built drawings of water lines, sanitary sewer lines, pump stations, roads, and drainage structures. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 408; Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § VII) 
Sec. 109-137. - Issuance of development permit. 
Upon approval or conditional approval of land development plans, the administrative officer shall issue a development permit as required by section 113-25. Issuance of a development permit shall constitute authorization for the applicant to begin land disturbing activities and the construction of improvements, subject to any grading permits, soil erosion permits, or other permits and permissions as may be required by the city engineer. A prerequisite to the issuance of a development permit shall be completion and signature of an indemnification agreement as indicated in exhibit A attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 409) 
Secs. 109-138—109-157. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 109-158. - Required submissions for final plat. 
In the case of a subdivision, upon completion of required improvements, the subdivider may then submit an application for final plat approval, which at minimum shall meet the requirements for final plat applications as specified in Table 1. In addition, the applicant for final plat shall submit to the administrative officer the following: 
(1)  One time-stable reproducible film copy or original of the plat; 
(2)  A letter from the city engineer certifying that all required improvements have been constructed and meet the specifications of the city. The subdivider shall, upon completion of the required improvements outlined in this article, request in writing that the city engineer report by letter that all improvements required by this article have been completed according to city specifications. The city engineer shall write a letter of compliance addressed to the subdivider with a copy to the administrative officer stating the subdivision complies with the provisions of this article. Prior to writing such letter, the city engineer shall inspect all underground installations, sub-grades, bases or courses of asphalt, and such improvements shall not be covered or hidden before they are inspected and accepted by the city engineer; 
(3)  A letter from the applicable electricity service company may be required indicating that service points for individual lots and streetlights, if required, have been installed; 
(4)  A performance bond for those required improvements not yet completed (e.g., pavement topping), if such delay in completion of required improvements is permitted by the administrative officer. The performance bond shall be: 
a.  Conditioned upon the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer of all work required within a specified time; 
b.  Payable to, and for the indemnification of, the city; 
c.  In an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required improvements not yet completed, plus an additional ten percent of said costs, as calculated by the city engineer; 
d.  With surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; and 
e.  Approved as to form and content by the city attorney. 
(5)  A maintenance bond, cash deposit, escrow account or other guarantee/instrument of financial security as approved by the city attorney to ensure maintenance of required improvements in the subdivision for a period of one year, payable to the city and in the amount of ten percent of the city engineer's estimate of actual construction cost. If, upon being notified of failure of required improvements, the subdivider does not correct the deficiency or commence work within ten days of notice, it shall be deemed to be a failure on the bond, and the city shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by public work or by private contract, and the bond or instrument of financial security shall be liable for the full amount of the cost of said repairs, as determined by the city engineer. 
(6)  As-built drawings acceptable to the city engineer of: 
a.  All streets showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines; 
b.  Centerline profile of all streets with final grades; and 
c.  Horizontal and vertical alignment, including profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines; 
provided, however, the administrative officer may waive this final plat submittal requirement for a set period of time if improvements and/or as-built drawings are not complete, subject to subsequent denial of building permits should such drawings not be submitted. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 410) 
Sec. 109-159. - Final plat specifications and certificates. 
The final plat shall be drawn to comply with the specifications in section 109-69 for final plats. Certificates shall be included on the final plat, as follows: 
(1)  Final surveyor's certificate. 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that this plat meets all requirements of the City of Cumming Subdivision and Land Development Regulations and Zoning Ordinance. 
By ____________ Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. ____________ . 
Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(2)  Certificate of ownership and dedication. 
(State of Georgia) 
(City of Cumming) 
The owner of record of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that he or she owns the land shown on this plat to be subdivided and hereby dedicates to the public forever, subject to formal acceptance by the mayor and council, the following: 

 

 
(3)  Certificate of approval. 
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL 
The administrative officer of the City of Cumming, Georgia certifies that this plat complies with the City of Cumming Zoning Ordinance, conditions of zoning, and the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations of the City of Cumming, and that this plat is hereby approved and released for recording purposes. 

 
(4)  Certification of City of Cumming Utilities Department approval. 
This is to certify that this plat and proposed water and sewerage facilities and stormwater management facilities are acceptable. 

 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 411; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), §§ 4, 5) 
Sec. 109-160. - Action on the final plat. 
Upon receipt of the completed final plat application, the administrative officer may transmit for review and comment a copy of the plat to applicable review agencies. He shall have ten working days to approve or disapprove of the plat. If said plat is substantially in conformance with the preliminary plat and is approved by the administrative officer and the city engineer, the signatures of the administrative officer and city engineer shall be placed on the reproducible film copy or original of the plat. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 412) 
Sec. 109-161. - Recording of final plats. 
Upon approval and without undue delay, the administrative officer shall have approved final plats recorded in the records of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and a time-stable reproducible film copy or original filed in the office of the administrative officer. Such copy of original shall not require an engineer or surveyor's stamp to protect the liability of the professionals involved. Recording fees shall be included in the fee charged for final plats and therefore paid by the city. The clerk of the superior court shall indicate on the filed copy, as well as the time-stable reproducible film copy or original, the book and page number in the county records where the final plat is recorded. Recordation of a final plat constitutes approval to begin the sale or transfer of subdivision lots. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 413) 
Sec. 109-162. - Assignment of street addresses. 
Upon recording of a final plat, the administrative officer shall assign each lot a street address and shall note each address in permanent ink on the time-stable, reproducible film copy or original. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 414) 
Sec. 109-163. - Distribution of recorded final plat. 
The final plat is a source of essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility officials, among others. The administrative officer shall be responsible for ensuring that each agency listed in this section receives a copy of the final recorded plat with assigned addresses: 
(1)  The county tax commissioner. 
(2)  The county tax assessor. 
(3)  The county health department. 
(4)  The city police department. 
(5)  The city fire department. 
(6)  The city building inspector. 
(7)  The city engineer. 
(8)  The United States Postal Service (local postmaster). 
At the discretion of the administrative officer, additional agencies or persons may be added to this section. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 415) 
Sec. 109-164. - Dedications of public streets and acceptance of improvements. 
At any date after one year has passed since the date of final plat approval, the subdivider may petition in writing to the administrative officer for the mayor and council by resolution to accept public streets and other dedications, in whole or in part, within the subdivision. Such improvements shall not be accepted for maintenance until approved by resolution by the mayor and council. Any instrument of financial guarantee shall be returned to the subdivider upon acceptance of public streets and improvements by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 416) 
Sec. 109-165. - Lot combinations and boundary line adjustments. 
(a)  An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the final plat requirements of this article. Where separate lots of land are proposed to be combined, they shall be submitted to the administrative officer as a final plat for review, approval and recording in the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the administrative officer and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the replat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. 

Lot Combination
(b)  One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the administrative officer and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the administrative officer and recorded. Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall include thereon that the replat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. 

Boundary Line Adjustment
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 417) 
Secs. 109-166—109-183. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 109-184—109-204. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC STREETS 

Sec. 109-205. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision and land development shall be provided over a public street, or if approved by the mayor and council, a private street. Each lot shall have access to a public street and a minimum of 50 feet of lot frontage on a public street; provided, however, that the mayor and council may permit one or more lots to be accessed by private streets, as more fully specified in this division; provided further, that in the case of a lot accessed by a circular cul-de-sac, the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to 30 feet. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 501) 
Sec. 109-206. - Conformance to adopted major thoroughfare and other plans. 
All streets and other features of the adopted comprehensive plan shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and if any, to the dimensions indicated on the major thoroughfare plan or transportation component or element of a comprehensive plan adopted by the mayor and council. In subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federally numbered highway, the approval of the state highway department may be required by the administrative officer. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 502) 
Sec. 109-207. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 503) 
Sec. 109-208. - Street plans for future phases of the tract. 
Where the plat or site plan proposed to be subdivided or developed includes only part of the tract owned or intended for subdivision or development by the subdivider or land developer, a tentative plan of a future street system for the portion not slated for immediate subdivision consideration may be required by the administrative officer and if required shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider or land developer at the time of submission of an application for preliminary plat or land development plan approval, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 504) 
Sec. 109-209. - Street names. 
Street names shall be approved by the administrative officer. Streets that are in alignment with existing named streets shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets in the city or county. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 505) 
_____
Sec. 109-210. - Street alignment, intersections, and jogs. 
Streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (90 degrees), but in no case shall such a street intersection be less than 75 degrees. Where street offsets or jogs cannot be avoided, offset "T" intersections shall be separated by a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet in urban areas and 300 feet in rural areas. 

Intersection Angles and Street Jogs
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 506) 
_____
Sec. 109-211. - Development along arterial street or limited access highway. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street or a limited access highway, the administrative officer may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street or, at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation suitably planted. Lots shall have no access to major streets (or limited access highways) but only to access streets. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 507) 
Sec. 109-212. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial or industrial developments, but may be provided in one- or two-family residential developments if the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the administrative officer of the need for alleys. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 508) 
Sec. 109-213. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, or public grounds shall not be permitted unless their control is placed in the hands of the mayor and council, under conditions approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 509) 
Sec. 109-214. - Dead-end streets. 
Streets that dead-end shall terminate in a cul-de-sac or other approved turnaround. Streets that are planned to continue at some future date shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac as required by the city engineer. Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, culs-de-sac or dead-end streets shall not be greater in length than 1,000 feet, unless approved by the administrative officer and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround, approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 510) 
Sec. 109-215. - Street right-of-way widths. 
The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial street widths, 100 feet or as shown in the major thoroughfare plan. 
(2)  Collector street, 60 feet. 
(3)  Minor street and dead-end street, 50 feet. 
(4)  Alleys, 20 feet. 
(5)  Culs-de-sac, commercial and industrial subdivisions, 60 feet (radius). 
(6)  Culs-de-sac, local residential streets, 50 feet (radius). 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 511) 
Sec. 109-216. - Street pavement widths. 
Street pavement widths shall be as follows measured from back of curb to back of curb: 
(1)  Arterial street widths, 60 feet or as shown in the major thoroughfare plan. 
(2)  Collector street, 39 feet. 
(3)  Minor street and dead-end street, 28 feet. 
(4)  Minor streets, commercial and industrial subdivisions, 32 feet. 
(5)  Alleys, 16 feet. 
(6)  Culs-de-sac, commercial and industrial subdivisions, 50 feet (radius). 
(7)  Culs-de-sac, local residential streets, 40 feet (radius). 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 512) 
Sec. 109-217. - Street grades. 
Maximum and minimum street grades shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial streets, not in excess of seven percent. 
(2)  Collector streets, not in excess of ten percent. 
(3)  Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, not in excess of 14 percent. 
(4)  No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 513) 
Sec. 109-218. - Horizontal curvature. 
The minimum radii of centerline curvature shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial streets, no less than 800 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets, 300 feet. 
(3)  Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, 100 feet. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 514) 
Sec. 109-219. - Tangents. 
Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent having a length not less than the following: 
(1)  Arterial streets, 200 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets, 100 feet. 
(3)  Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, 50 feet. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 515) 
Sec. 109-220. - Vertical alignment. 
Vertical alignment shall be such that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Major streets shall have a sight distance of at least 500 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(2)  Collector streets shall have a sight distance of at least 300 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(3)  Minor streets shall have a sight distance of at least 200 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 516) 
Sec. 109-221. - Curbline radius. 
The curbline radius at street intersections shall be at least 25 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a longer radius may be required. For commercial and industrial subdivision streets, a minimum 40-foot curbline radius shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 517) 
Sec. 109-222. - Bridges. 
Bridges on public rights-of-way shall meet current American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials standards, or as may be determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 518) 
Sec. 109-223. - Right-of-way clearance. 
All trees, brush, stumps, rocks, or other debris shall be cleared from the street right-of-way as required. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 519) 
Sec. 109-224. - Grading of streets. 
All streets shall be graded to lines, grades and cross sections approved on the plans. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 520) 
Sec. 109-225. - Street paving and base. 
The base and sub-base shall be installed in compliance with specifications of the city engineer. 
(1)  Residential streets shall consist of type 1 paving, mix 200 pounds square yard crusher run into top six inches of sub-base, if required; place and compact six inches crusher run base; place two inches plant mix binder, place one inch plant mix topping, type F. The final top coat to be applied after development is approximately 95 percent complete. 
(2)  For commercial and industrial street paving base, use eight inches graded aggregate base (GAB), prime and place two inches of plant mix type E and surface with one inch of compact hot plant mix topping, type F. For commercial and industrial street paving base, use six inches crusher run base, prime and place two inches of plant mix asphaltic binder and surface with one inch of compact hot plant mix topping, type E. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 521; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 10(1003)) 
Sec. 109-226. - Curb and gutter. 
Curb and gutter shall be installed along both sides of all paving; provided however, that subdivisions involving residential lots with a minimum size of three acres, and a minimum lot frontage of 200 feet, shall not require curb and gutter, so long as appropriate right-of-way and drainage improvements are provided as approved by the city engineer. Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall require curb and gutter regardless of proposed lot sizes and/or lot widths. All curb and gutter, valley, gutter, driveway aprons and sidewalks shall conform to city specifications. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 522) 
Sec. 109-227. - Street signs. 
Street signs shall be furnished and installed at all street intersections on the rights-of-way by the developer and shall be green scotchlite with white legends mounted on ten-foot round posts. Exact locations shall be approved by the city engineer prior to installation. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 523) 
Sec. 109-228. - Street right-of-way improvements. 
All street rights-of-way outside of the paved portions, shall be graded to conform to approved cross section and shall be soiled with a material acceptable to the city engineer. These areas shall be grassed as directed by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 524) 
Sec. 109-229. - Street trees. 
Street trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall be placed or retained so as not to obstruct sight distances at street intersections. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 525) 
Sec. 109-230. - Sidewalks. 
When sidewalks are required, the subdivider shall furnish and install all required paving materials without cost to the city, in accordance with city specifications. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet in residential areas and eight feet in commercial areas and shall be provided under the following conditions: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be installed in subdivisions located within a mile from an existing or proposed school on one side of any subdivision street providing access to such school, when the administrative officer determines sidewalks are necessary to provide for pedestrian movement. 
(2)  The administrative officer may require additional sidewalks and wider sidewalks on streets leading to or going through commercial areas, school sites, places of public assembly and other congested areas. 
(3)  Sidewalks in residential areas shall not be less than two feet from street curbs. 
(4)  All driveway aprons over sidewalk areas shall be paved with concrete by the developer or builder. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall be located not less than one foot from the property line. Sidewalks shall be four inches thick and consist of concrete (2,500 psi at 28 days) and shall be located on the north and east sides of streets. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 526) 
Sec. 109-231. - Streetlights. 
(a)  Streetlights shall be provided in accordance with city specifications by the developers of a subdivision prior to the approval of a final plat. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities and by the city. The fixtures shall be mounted no more than 30 feet above the ground and shall have appropriate arm length to place the light over the street. No arm shall be less than 2½ feet long unless approved by the city engineer. Post top luminaries may be permitted when approved by the city engineer. Fixtures shall be located no more than 500 feet apart, unless approved by the city engineer, and at least one light shall be located at each street intersection within the subdivision or land development. 
(b)  The developer shall pay all costs for standard poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation, as well as arrange an agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. The city shall assume the responsibility and make the monthly payments to the power company for electrical energy for each streetlight only after these requirements have been accomplished and improvements accepted. Streetlights will be taken over one year after lights have been installed and the developer or homeowners' association will be responsible until that time. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 527) 
Sec. 109-232. - Acceleration/deceleration lanes. 
(a)  For subdivisions or land developments accessing state routes, the state department of transportation may require the installation of acceleration/deceleration lanes. 
(b)  The city engineer may require the installation of a deceleration lane for a distance of 200 feet and a 50-foot taper from all project entrances serving commercial and industrial subdivisions, and residential subdivisions serving 50 lots or more. For all commercial properties, if an acceleration/deceleration lane is not required, the subdivider or land developer may be required to construct a wide flare entrance according specifications of the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 528) 
Sec. 109-233. - Improvements to abutting streets. 
For subdivisions and land developments that abut and access an abutting public street, the subdivider or land developer shall install curb and gutter, sidewalk, streetlights, other road improvements, and if required a deceleration lane, according to standards and specifications of the city engineer along all abutting public streets. When a subdivision or land development uses an unpaved public right-of-way for access, the subdivider or land developer shall improve that right-of-way to a pavement width consistent with city street design standards. Such improvements shall be from the subdivision or land development entrance to the paved city street which the city engineer determines will be the primary direction of travel for residents of the subdivision or occupants of the land development. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 529) 
Secs. 109-234—109-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE STREETS 

Sec. 109-260. - Permitted upon application. 
Private streets may, upon application, be permitted by the mayor and council within subdivisions, subject to the requirements of this article. Applications for approval of private streets shall be considered by the mayor and council. Following a recommendation by the administrative officer and city engineer, the mayor and council shall consider the application and may impose conditions on the approval of private streets to ensure various public purposes and to mitigate potential problems with private streets. No final plat involving a private street shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 601) 
Sec. 109-261. - Engineering plans required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval of land development plans from administrative officer and city engineer in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 602) 
Sec. 109-262. - Standards for private streets. 
All private streets shall be constructed to all standards for public streets as specified in this division. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 603) 
Sec. 109-263. - Street names and signs. 
Private streets shall be named, subject to the approval of the administrative officer. The subdivider of land involving a private street shall install street signs with content containing the street name and the designation "private," or as approved by the city engineer. The sign signifying the private street may be required by the city engineer to be a different color than that of street signs provided for public streets, in order to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 604) 
Sec. 109-264. - Easements. 
Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private street. Such easement shall at minimum be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street by the major thoroughfare plan and the city engineer for the type of public street (local, collector, etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street. Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or density maximums established by the city's zoning chapter. In the cases of private streets, the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private street shall either: 
(1)  Be shown in a manner on the final plat such that each lot fronting the private street extends to the centerline of the private street and such that no lot shall be permitted to be divided by the general purpose public access and utility easement required and established for a private street; or 
(2)  It shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private homeowners' association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot). 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 605) 
Sec. 109-265. - Maintenance. 
The city shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. A private maintenance covenant recorded with the county clerk of the superior court shall be required for any private street and other improvements within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for noncompliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms: 
(1)  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. The covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners' or property owners' association in cases of a subdivision of seven or more lots fronting on a private street. 
(2)  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
(3)  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private street. 
(4)  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street. 
(5)  The covenant shall run with the land. 
(6)  The mayor and council may, at its discretion, as a condition of approving private streets, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners' or property owners' association, or the mayor and council may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the city engineer into an escrow account or other suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private streets and stormwater management improvements, to be drawn from by the homeowners' or property owners' association as maintenance and repair needs may arise. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 606) 
Sec. 109-266. - Specifications for final plats involving private streets. 
No final plat involving a private street shall be approved by the administrative officer for recording unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
(1)  Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required by this article. 
(2)  "Warning, the City of Cumming has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access and utility easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat." 
(3)  "Grant of easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement shown on this plat for private street is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the City of Cumming, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 
____________  Signature of Property Owner" 
(4)  The following certificate of dedication shall be required, unless the mayor and council waives the dedication requirement. 
"Certificate of dedication. All water and sewer lines installed within the general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) are hereby dedicated to the City of Cumming. 
____________  Signature of Property Owner" 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 607) 
Sec. 109-267. - Purchaser's acknowledgement. 
Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the city, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgment of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on such lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility. 
(I) (We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction (insert address or attach legal description) . (I) (We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am) (We are) purchasing and requires (me) (us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am) (we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots in this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me) (us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my) (our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees. (I) (We) further understand that the city has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road serving the lot in question. I (We) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am) (we are) purchasing. 
____________  Purchaser" 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 608) 
Secs. 109-268—109-297. - Reserved. 
_____
DIVISION 4. - LOTS AND BLOCKS 

Sec. 109-298. - Block lengths and widths. 
(a)  Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals so as to provide adequate cross traffic. Blocks in residential subdivisions should not exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 600 feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from these standards. In blocks 800 feet or longer, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block may be required by the planning commission near the center of blocks. 
(b)  The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries. 

Block Length, Block, and Pedestrian Way
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 701) 
_____
Sec. 109-299. - Lot width and size. 
(a)  Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning chapter. Residential lots should have a depth not greater than three times the width of the lot at the building line, unless unusual circumstances make these limitations not practicable. Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. 
(b)  Where individual septic tanks are used, the county health department shall approve minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards of the state department of public health. 
(c)  Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to use intended. 
(d)  Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or required yards/building setback lines. 

Adequate Building Area Required
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 702) 
Sec. 109-300. - Lot lines. 
All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 703) 
Sec. 109-301. - Building lines. 
A building line meeting the front yard/building setback requirements of the zoning chapter, as a minimum, shall be established on all lots. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 704) 
Sec. 109-302. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 705) 
Sec. 109-303. - Flag lots. 
Flag lots which meet minimum lot area requirements and meet the minimum lot width at the front building setback line where the building is placed may be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle portion of the lot shall not be less than 30 feet wide, and the panhandle portion of the lot shall be not more than 200 feet long. Not more than two such panhandle access points shall abut each other. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 706) 
Sec. 109-304. - Lot remnants not permitted. 
All remnants of lots below any minimum lot size which may be required, left over after subdividing of a larger tract, must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. The administrative officer may permit a lot remnant for a specific purpose such as a detention pond, provided that access and design is appropriate and the lot remnant is restricted to specific nonbuilding use. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 707) 
Sec. 109-305. - Monuments. 
For all subdivisions, a state-registered land surveyor shall install permanent survey monuments at all property corners and land lot lines, prior to final plat approval. Lot corners shall be marked with metal rods not less than one-half inch in diameter and 18 inches in length and driven so as to be stabilized in the ground. Permanent survey monuments shall also be installed in accordance with the most recent edition of section 180-7-.05 Monument of the Rules of State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers & Land Surveyors and the Georgia Plat Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67). 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 708) 
Secs. 109-306—109-328. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EASEMENTS AND UTILITIES 

Sec. 109-329. - Division requirements. 
Every subdivision and land development, except in those cases that are specifically exempted from the requirements of this division, shall be required to have installed the subdivision improvements specified in this division. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, art. VIII) 
Sec. 109-330. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements for stormwater management shall be provided for all drainage and stormwater management facilities as required by chapter 111, pertaining to utilities, subject to the approval of the city director of utilities. 
(b)  Where easements are needed for utility locations, they shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer at the width specified by the appropriate utility provider. Unless otherwise approved by the city director of utilities, easements for sanitary sewer and water lines shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. All easements required pursuant to this section shall be shown on the preliminary plat if required, final plat if required, and land development plans. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 801; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 6) 
Sec. 109-331. - Water system. 
All water mains shall be installed along with a service connection for each lot or land development and be in operating condition prior to final plat approval if required and paving installation. This system shall be connected to the city water system in a manner that meets all current specifications of the city utilities department, or a source accepted by the county health department. All pipes, valves, and other components shall conform to all current specifications and regulations and city utilities department. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 803; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 7) 
Sec. 109-332. - Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be located and set in accordance with city specifications. Fire hydrants shall be required for all nonresidential land developments and all subdivisions. Fire hydrants with appropriate water pressure at appropriate intervals throughout the subdivision or land development shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer as required by the county fire department. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and within 500 feet of any principal dwelling. Hydrants, fittings, valves, and fire department connections shall be approved by the county fire department. Fire department connections shall be not less than 18 inches or more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the county fire department. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street within the right-of-way shared by such underground utilities. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 804) 
Sec. 109-333. - Sanitary sewerage system. 
(a)  The subdivider or land developer shall provide sanitary sewer facilities to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision, or to the land development, in accordance with the requirements of chapter 111, pertaining to utilities, as adopted and as may be amended from time to time, applicable specifications adopted by the city department of utilities which may be amended from time to time, and any applicable requirements of this division. All street sewers serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. A formula may be developed by the director of utilities to provide for a sharing of the costs of other sewer facilities needed to serve the subdivision or land development when certain of the required sewer facilities are necessary to serve other subdivisions or land developments in the same drainage basin. 
(b)  When a public sanitary sewer is not available within 100 feet of the property line of the subdivision or land development in question, the director of utilities may in cases where sanitary sewer service is not available or reasonably accessible, may approve an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot or the land development subject to compliance with the standards of the county health department. If public sewerage is not available, but is expected to be accessible within a reasonable time period after completion of the subdivision or land development, an alternate method for sewage disposal for individual lots or the land development will be required on an interim basis. In this instance, unless otherwise determined by the mayor and council, the developer will be required to construct a complete sanitary sewer system for the subdivision or land development, including outfall lines, street sewers, and service stubs to individual lots. All sewers will be plugged and otherwise protected to ensure serviceability at the time of connection to the public system, and will conform to the specifications of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 805; Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § IV; Ord. of 5-17-2005(02), § 18) 
Sec. 109-334. - Utilities. 
The gas system and any other underground utilities system when it is to be installed in a subdivision or land development shall be installed along with service connections before any paving is laid. All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and cable television, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision or land development. Whenever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except when existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 806) 
Secs. 109-335—109-356. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORM DRAINAGE AND WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 109-357. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  To provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and the region, it is essential that the quality of public water supplies be ensured. The ability of natural systems to attenuate the negative effects of stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threaten the aquatic integrity and storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces can introduce toxicants, nutrients and sedimentation into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable. Studies have documented that the main causes of degradation are increased flows, sedimentation and erosion, and habitat destruction. This article addresses these concerns through stream buffers and water quality protection requirements. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to comply with the requirements of section IV of General Permit (No. GAR100000), Authorization to Discharge Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity, June 12, 2000, which requires those persons conducting a construction activity of five acres (disturbed area) on sites greater than five acres or part of a common development greater than five acres to prepare and implement an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan (plan) and a comprehensive monitoring program (program). 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.1)) 
Sec. 109-358. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the City of Cumming Separate Storm sewer System which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Agriculture means the raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, ratites, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals, or the production of agricultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural and nonstructural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. 
City of Cumming Separate Storm sewer System means a conveyance or system of conveyances which is located within city-owned right-of-way and designed and used only for collecting or conveying stormwater runoff or other approved surface water discharges. 
Clean Water Act (CWA) means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
Clean Water Act (CWA), section 401, means that provision of federal law that requires that an applicant for a federal license or permit provide a certification that any discharges from the facility will comply with the act including water quality standard requirements. 
Clean Water Act, section 404 means provisions which regulate the disposal of dredged and fill material into waters of the United States, including wetlands. Other activities which destroy wetlands such as drainage, flooding, pumping and burning are not regulated under the CWA unless they entail discharges of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States. 
Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, storm drains, etc. 
County health department means the Forsyth County Health Department established by the Georgia Health Code (O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1) or the executive officer and his designated representative acting on the health department's behalf for the administration and enforcement of septic tank rules. 
Crop means fruits and products of all annual or perennial plants, trees, and shrubs and shall also include plants, trees, shrubs, and other agricultural products that are produced for sale. 
Crossing includes those for roads, driveways, paths, and utilities. 
Development activity means manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Discharge means the release of treated or untreated stormwater runoff or other material to the City of Cumming separate storm sewer. 
Drainage system means a conveyance or system of conveyances designed and used for collecting or conveying stormwater runoff. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, or gravity. 
Filling means the natural or manmade placement of any soil or solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overgrowth of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Forestry means the profession embracing the science, art, and practice of creating, managing, using, and conserving forests and associated resources for human benefit in a sustainable manner to meet desired goals, needs, and values. 
Grading means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof. 
Hazardous material means a flammable, highly corrosive, acidic or toxic material as identified in the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 12-14-1) in the oil and hazardous materials spill reporting requirements. 
Illicit connection means a connection to the City of Cumming's Separate Storm sewer System that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges, pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the City of Cumming Separate Storm sewer System). 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, swimming pools, or patios. 
Intermittent stream means a stream which flows only at certain times of the year when it receives water from springs or from some sub-surface source, such as, a seep. This definition is not meant to include drainageways that flow only during and shortly after storm events. 
Issuing authority means the mayor and council. 
Land disturbing activity means a land change or construction activity for residential, commercial, industrial and institutional land use that can result in soil erosion from water or wind or movement of sediments or pollutants into state waters or onto lands of the state or in accelerated stormwater runoff. These activities include but are not limited to clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land. 
Land use means how land is occupied or utilized. 
Lot. See article I of this chapter. 
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article or to prevent structural failure of such systems. 
Maximum extent practicable means best management practices, control techniques, system design or engineering methods, and any other provisions which can be economically and reasonably implemented to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the City of Cumming Separate Storm sewer System. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Nonpoint source (NPS) pollution means water pollution that is: 
(1)  Induced by natural processes including precipitation, seepage, percolation and runoff; 
(2)  Not necessarily traceable to any discrete or identifiable facility; and 
(3)  Better controlled by using best management practices. 
Perennial stream means a stream which flows continuously in a well-defined channel throughout most of the year under normal climatic conditions. 
Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, and includes any individual, firm, corporation, government agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having joint or common interests, or any other legal entity. 
Pervious surface means any surface that allows stormwater to infiltrate the ground below, including, but not limited to, gravel, porous pavement (such as, a lattice paver), mulch, grassed areas, and forested areas. 
Pollution means the contamination or other significant alteration of any water's physical, chemical, or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to render such water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish, or other aquatic life. 
Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state, or federal government. 
Procedure means a procedure adopted by the utility, by and through the City of Cumming or its agent, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this article or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the City of Cumming. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Riparian zones or riparian environments means the areas that border streams, rivers, lakes, and wetlands. Riparian zones can be floodplains, streamside forests or stream banks. They are usually different from surrounding lands because they have unique soil and vegetation characteristics and are strongly influenced by water. Riparian zones provide an interface between the water and the land and they serve many functions which make them valuable to people. 
Sediment means soils, both organic and inorganic, or other superficial materials transported and/or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Silt fencing means a web of mechanically or melt bonded polymer netting, monofilament or fibers entangled to form a strong and dimensionally stable matrix to catch storm runoff and soil particles as shown in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (latest edition). 
Silviculture means the art and science of growing forest crops. 
Site means any lot, plot, parcel, or tract of land. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow-melt runoff and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this article. The term "stormwater management" includes a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater management design manual means the most recent manual of design, performance, and review criteria for stormwater management practices, prepared under the direction of the City of Cumming. 
Stormwater management facility means constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to improve stormwater quality and/or quantity, including, but not limited to, detention basins, retention basins, sediment basins, constructed wetlands, natural systems, oil/water separators, modular pavement, infiltration devices, and associated pipes, swales, ditches, and culverts. 
Stormwater management plan means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise all of the information and specifications for the drainage systems, structures, best management practices, concepts, and techniques that will be used to control stormwater as required by this article and the stormwater management design manual. Also included are the supporting engineering calculations and results of any computer analysis. 
Stormwater manual means a compilation of stormwater facility design and engineering criteria as approved by the City of Cumming Zoning Administrator as authorized by the mayor and council. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff, that enters a stormwater conveyance system or other concentrated flow during and following a precipitation event. 
Stream bank means the uppermost part of the bank, usually marked by a break in slope, or as otherwise defined by rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). A stream bank is not necessarily the water's edge. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Top of bank means the mark on all lakes and streams that will be found by examining the beds and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland in respect to vegetation. 
Undisturbed buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Undisturbed upland area means any fully vegetated lands, greater than 200 feet from the banks of a water body, that are to remain ungraded after a project's completion. These areas include, but are not limited to undisturbed forested areas, pasture land that is to remain undeveloped, and other natural areas. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of the water. 
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.2)) 
Sec. 109-359. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.3)) 
Sec. 109-360. - Exempted activities. 
The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Agricultural, silviculture, and farming practices. Agricultural activities involving the planting and harvesting of crops, and the raising of poultry and livestock, are exempted from provisions of this article provided generally accepted farming practices are followed. Silviculture activities are exempt provided they conform to the best management practices established by the state forestry commission. In order to qualify for this exemption, the practices must be bona fide agricultural or silviculture practices. Nonagricultural related projects being performed on land that is zoned agricultural do not qualify for this exemption. 
(2)  Preexisting land uses. Any existing structure which is nonconforming with respect to the buffer requirements of this chapter may be re-established if damaged or destroyed, provided the degree of nonconformity is not increased with the construction of the replacement structure. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.4)) 
Sec. 109-361. - Sedimentation and erosion control ordinance incorporated. 
The provisions of the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of the city, as amended, is incorporated herein by reference and shall constitute a part of this article to the extent applicable to activities conducted hereunder, including the application of civil penalties. Sedimentation and erosion control practices will be required on all construction sites. No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity or otherwise alter the hydraulic or vegetative characteristics of a protected area without first having obtained a written permit from the city, unless otherwise exempted. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.5)) 
Sec. 109-362. - Erosion control plan and monitoring on site with five acres or more. 
Pursuant to section IV of General Permit (No. GAR100000), Authorization to Discharge Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity, (June 12, 2000), those persons conducting a construction activity of five acres (disturbed area) on sites greater than five acres or part of a common development greater than five acres shall prepare and implement an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan (plan) and a comprehensive monitoring program (program). The plan shall describe those best management practices (BMPs) which will be used at the site to control the discharge of sediment and other pollutants. BMPs will be designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. The program will describe how the receiving water will be monitored for turbidity. A monitoring summary report shall be sent to the state environmental protection division each month. Copies of these reports shall be sent to the city department of utilities. The installation of BMP devices may be subject to section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Persons conducting construction activities are also responsible for meeting water quality and wetland-related requirements of sections 404 and 401 of the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.6)) 
Sec. 109-363. - Unlawful stormwater discharge. 
(a)  Pursuant to General Permit (No. GAR100000), it shall be unlawful to discharge stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained. It shall be unlawful to allow discharge of stormwater runoff that results in the turbidity of receiving water being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries. 
(b)  Upon notice from the city, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent, or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may resume. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. Until the stop order has been rescinded, only work that is necessary to achieve compliance is allowed. No inspection shall be conducted on the property by the building inspection department while a stop work order is in effect. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.7)) 
Sec. 109-364. - Stormwater management—Report required. 
(a)  A stormwater management report shall be submitted during the development review process for every project to which this article applies. A professional engineer currently registered in the state must prepare the report. The purpose of this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff, so that stormwater runoff hazards are not created, existing runoff-related problems are not expounded, and that stormwater quality is not adversely affected, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed. 
(b)  The stormwater management report shall identify the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre-developed and post-developed conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties may require anticipating future development in addition to addressing existing conditions. It shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at a satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the site relative to any applicable watercourses, drainage divides, drainage structures and other pertinent features. 
(c)  The stormwater management report shall estimate the stormwater quality in terms of total suspended solids for both pre-developed and post-developed conditions. 
(d)  The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainageway immediately downstream from the project. In determining downstream effects from stormwater discharge control structures and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies, using the two-, ten-, and 25-year design storm, shall extend to the next downstream structure or shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed. If the discharge calculations indicate that adjacent properties, between the exit of the proposed development and the ten percent downstream point, might be adversely impacted by the proposed development, then the engineer shall provide a summary of his recommendations. 
(e)  The site plan that is submitted in conjunction with the stormwater management report shall depict all streams, lakes, wetlands, and other bodies of water. Additionally, the plan shall depict relevant the boundaries of the 100-year floodplain. The floodplain boundary information must be obtained using Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) guidelines. One hundred-year base flood elevations (BFEs) for areas that are designated as approximate zone A on the city's FEMA maps must be calculated using appropriate FEMA methodologies. Scaling off the FEMA maps to derive flood boundary information is unacceptable and shall not be permitted. 
(f)  The following criteria shall be evaluated by the engineer preparing the stormwater management report: 
(1)  Existing land uses downstream. 
(2)  Anticipated future land uses downstream. 
(3)  Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development. 
(4)  Presence of existing stormwater quality and/or quantity problems. 
(5)  Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage systems. 
(6)  Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously. 
(7)  Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the project site. 
(8)  The nature of the receiving watercourse. 
(9)  All designs, calculations, and rationale must follow the principles set forth in the city stormwater manual. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.8)) 
Sec. 109-365. - Same—Facility required. 
Unless specifically exempted by this article, all development activities shall require the construction of a stormwater management facility when the following are found to exist: 
(1)  Any development activity that results in the increase of peak rate of discharge by more than one cubic foot per second in the ten-year storm when compared to the site prior to its development. Sites undergoing numerous small additions will require a stormwater management facility when this threshold is met. 
(2)  Any development activity that results in the calculated discharge of 65 pounds per acre per year of suspended solids. The suspended solids discharge rate is to be calculated using the city stormwater quality performance review form, and no water quality monitoring is required to verify compliance with this suspended solids requirement. Sites undergoing numerous small additions will require a stormwater management facility when this threshold is met. 
(3)  Any development activity for which the stormwater management report indicates will result in adverse impacts to stormwater quality and/or quantity. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.9)) 
Sec. 109-366. - Same—Facility design criteria. 
(a)  All designs, calculations, and rationale must follow the principles set forth in the city stormwater manual. 
(b)  Stormwater runoff must be managed to control the velocity at the point of discharge so as to minimize accelerated erosion of the site and increased sedimentation of the streams. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures and devices shall be so planned, designed and constructed as to provide for a range of design flows for flood control. These design flows should be demonstrated for the two-, ten-, and 25-year storm events using the procedures as outlined in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's Technical Release 55 Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds or other acceptable calculation procedures. All BMPs must be designed for a 25-year storm. All stormwater management facilities must have outlet devices able to effectively route the 100-year storm. All disturbed land must drain to an approved BMP, and stormwater runoff must be managed for the entire drainage area above the detention system or BMP. 
(c)  Stormwater management facilities can only be located in perennial streams with strict adherence to United States Army Corps of Engineers permitting requirements. Such in-stream facilities do not include those for controlling erosion at land disturbing activities. Proper documentation demonstrating compliance with corps requirements must be provided before the city will permit the in-stream stormwater management facility. Additionally, a dredging plan depicting how the facility will be cleaned of silt accumulations in the future must be provided prior to permitting. 
(d)  During construction, all land disturbing activities (to include all land uses) must comply with sedimentation and erosion control procedures/program as defined by General Permit (No. GAR100000), and per the soil and sediment control ordinance in chapter 107. 
(e)  Applicants must demonstrate compliance with the stormwater control plan to the city prior to approval of any building or subdivision permit request. 
(f)  After construction, runoff from the first 1.0 inch of rainfall must be captured and released evenly over a 48-hour period. Facilities must maintain peak flows for the two-, ten-, and 25-year storm at the property boundaries equal to or less than flow under undeveloped conditions and be able to route a 100-year storm through the facility. The site must discharge no more than a calculated 65 pounds of suspended solids per acre per year. The suspended solids discharge rate is to be calculated using the city stormwater quality performance review form, and no water quality monitoring is required to verify compliance with this suspended solids requirement. Alternative best management practices and alternative modeling methods are allowed and encouraged provided the same theoretical level of stormwater quality and quantity is achieved. The city will verify that best management practices deemed necessary by the city stormwater quality performance review form, or the approved alternative modeling method, are installed on site. The property owner may choose to designate additional undisturbed buffer areas to reach the targeted suspended solids discharge rate. The proper installation and maintenance of BMPs, undisturbed upland areas, and stream buffers deemed necessary by the city stormwater quality performance review form, or alternative modeling method, shall constitute a complete defense to any allegation of noncompliance with this subsection, regardless of the result of water quality monitoring. The city stormwater quality performance review form uses the following BMP efficiencies and loading rates to calculate the discharge of suspended solids: 
(1)  BMP efficiencies. 

 
(2)  Total suspended solids (TSS) loading rates applied to land use categories. 

 
(g)  Stormwater management facility fencing. Fences and warning signs will be required on all detention ponds, constructed wetlands, retention ponds or similar devices where the sides of the device adjacent to the water are steeper than 3:1 and the depth of the water in the pond is greater than three feet. Fences shall be five-foot-high chain link or other approved material with a 12-foot-wide gate. The gate shall be locked with a master number one lock that is keyed as per the city, and two keys will be provided to the city. Fences shall be located on the outside edge of the 20-foot perimeter easement when possible. 
(h)  A silt gauge will be installed on all detention ponds consisting of a durable, weather-resistant post. The post will be embedded a minimum of two feet and extend a minimum of five feet above the ground. Numbers and adjacent tick marks must be on the post beginning with the number "1" at one foot above the ground elevation and thereafter a number and tick mark for each corresponding foot. Numbers and tick marks must be clear, readable, weather-resistant, and durable. 
(i)  A concrete survey marker shall be placed in the near vicinity of the stormwater management facility. The marker shall be a minimum of five inches by five inches in width and be embedded one foot into the ground. The marker shall have a "PK" nail embedded in the top. The marker must be placed above the high water elevation of the facility and within the drainage easement area. Alternate survey markers are allowed with prior approval from the city. 
(j)  Outlet structures and piping for residential stormwater management facilities must be constructed of concrete to be eligible for acceptance into the city maintenance system. 
(k)  All stormwater inlets installed by the developer shall have a storm sewer stencil or insignia approved by the planning and zoning director. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.11)) 
Sec. 109-367. - Residential stormwater facility easements. 
The developer shall execute a 20-foot drainage easement surrounding the entire perimeter of the facility. The easement boundary will be measured from the 100-year stormwater ponding limits or six inches above the elevation of the overflow. Additionally, all associated piping, channels, ditches, streams or other areas that are designed for stormwater to flow to and from the stormwater management facility shall require a 20-foot easement measured ten feet in both directions from the appropriate centerline. A 20-foot easement shall connect the facility to the nearest public road. The easement will be in favor of the city to allow the city to inspect and maintain the facility as necessary. No obstruction shall be built, constructed or planted that would inhibit proper function of the facility and its associated drainage systems. No fences or planting of shrubbery shall be allowed on the access easement. No portion of the easement shall be steeper than 3:1. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.12)) 
Sec. 109-368. - Stormwater management facility easements, nonresidential. 
The property owner shall execute a 20-foot drainage easement surrounding the entire perimeter of the facility in favor of the city to allow the city to inspect and observe the facility as necessary. The easement boundary will be measured from the 100-year stormwater ponding limits or six inches above the elevation of the overflow. The property owner shall additionally grant permission to the city, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the property and to inspect the facilities whenever the city deems necessary. The city maintains the right to make emergency repairs to the facility as deemed necessary. No obstruction shall be built, constructed or planted that would inhibit proper function of the facility and its associated drainage systems. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.13)) 
Sec. 109-369. - Bonding of residential stormwater management facilities. 
Residential stormwater management facilities must be bonded. Bonds will not be released until all provisions of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.14)) 
Sec. 109-370. - Acceptance of residential systems. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities that have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans will be inspected at the time of final platting, and a punch list will be provided at that time. Prior to final plat approval, the following items must be completed: 
(1)  All punch list items must be properly addressed. 
(2)  After construction and before approval of the final plat, the designer shall submit a certified field run topographic map of the detention area and a revised hydrology study using the as-built topographic map. The topographic map of the stormwater management facility should include the state plane coordinates and mean sea level elevations of applicable outfalls, silt gauges, and survey markers. The as-built will be submitted in electronic form and hard-copy form to the city planning and zoning department. 
(3)  The designer shall certify that the facility is working as it was designed and that the required detention storage and outflow rates are being provided. 
(4)  The stormwater management facility will be bonded. 
(5)  All accumulations of silt need to be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the pond is at the design grade. The silt gauge should read zero upon completion. 
(b)  Subsequently, the facilities will be inspected prior to release of bonds. At that time, any deficiencies in the facility will be noted in the 45-day letter. The following items must be completed: 
(1)  All deficiencies noted on the 45-day letter must be properly addressed. 
(2)  All accumulations of silt need to be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the pond is at the design grade. The silt gauge should read zero upon completion. 
(3)  The entire stormwater management facility needs to be stabilized with permanent vegetation as shown on the approved plans. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.15)) 
Sec. 109-371. - Acceptance of nonresidential systems. 
A final inspection of nonresidential stormwater management systems will occur at the time the developer requests a certificate of occupancy inspection. At that time, any deficiencies in the facility will be noted as a punch-list item. The commercial development will not receive a certificate of occupancy until the following items are completed: 
(1)  After construction and before acceptance for occupation or otherwise, the designer shall submit a certified field run topographic map of the detention area and a revised hydrology study using the as-built topographic map. The topographic map of the stormwater management facility should include the state plane coordinates and mean sea level elevations of applicable outfalls, silt gauges, and survey markers. The as-built will be submitted in electronic form and hard-copy form. 
(2)  The designer shall certify that the facility is working as it was designed and that the required detention storage and outflow rates are being provided. 
(3)  All accumulations of silt need to be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the pond is at the design grade. The silt gauge should read zero upon completion. 
(4)  The entire stormwater management facility needs to be stabilized with permanent vegetation as shown on the approved plans. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.16)) 
Sec. 109-372. - Unlawful discharges. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater; provided, however, that the following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and other water source not containing pollutants as approved by the city. 
(2)  Any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person violates this article of the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(c)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an appropriate onsite wastewater management system or sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city department of utilities. 
(d)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(e)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.17)) 
Sec. 109-373. - Authority to conduct investigations. 
The local issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.18)) 
Sec. 109-374. - Inspection, maintenance, and repair of systems. 
(a)  Upon installation, the city will periodically inspect stormwater management facilities to determine that they are functioning properly. Deficiencies will be noted to the owner in writing. If facilities are to be dedicated and are accepted by the city, the maintenance and repair of publicly accepted stormwater management facilities shall be the responsibility of the city. However, if the facilities are not publicly dedicated and accepted by the city, then the property owner on which the stormwater management facilities are located shall be responsible for proper inspection, maintenance, repair, and corrective action as my be required by the city. If a property owner or homeowner's association will be responsible for stormwater management facilities, then the planning and zoning director shall require that a note be placed on the final plat specifying these requirements and responsibilities. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to repair deficiencies in a timely manner. Failure on the part of the owner to repair deficient stormwater detention facilities shall be a violation and will be punishable according to this chapter. The city may determine that the condition of the facility poses a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare and warrants immediate action. If the owner of such a facility does not make repairs in a time allowed by the city, the city may determine that it is necessary to make an emergency repair as allowed in this chapter. The cost of such repairs will be assessed to the property owner. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2004(02), § III(10.19)) 
Chapter 111 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 111-1 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 18, 2014 , repealed the former ch. 111, §§ 111-19—111-33, 111-55—111-73, 111-103—111-108, 111-128—111-145, 111-174—111-185, 111-209—111-220, 111-249—111-258, 111-280—111-288, 111-310—111-319, 111-342, 111-373—111-378, 111-400—111-406, 111-426—111-430, 111-459—111-467, and enacted a new ch. 111 as set out herein. Sections 111-1(A) and (B), 111-186, 111-221, and 111-222 have been omitted from codification. The former ch. 111 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Oct. 26, 2007; an ordinance adopted Oct. 21, 2008; and an ordinance adopted Dec. 21, 2010. See Code Comparative Table for detailed derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 111-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Cumming Utilities Ordinance." 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-1(C)) 
Secs. 111-2—111-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION (RED FLAG) PROGRAM 

Sec. 111-19. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-19) 
Sec. 111-20. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means: 
(1)  Any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; 
(2)  Any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or 
(3)  Any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer (consumer) means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-20) 
Sec. 111-21. - Findings. 
(a)  The city may be a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer and garbage services. 
(c)  The city has had no negative experience with identity theft related to covered accounts. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and closing an account have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening, closing or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment; and 
(5)  Use by another of a customer's personal identifying information to close a customer's account. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-21) 
Sec. 111-22. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer consisting of either a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons (corporations, etc.), a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Upon verification of the customer's identity, the identification card shall be scanned or otherwise entered into the city's computer system and then returned to the customer. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-22) 
Sec. 111-23. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. Such password(s) shall be changed by the director of information technology or his designee on a regular basis, shall be at least six characters in length. Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(b)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-23) 
Sec. 111-24. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-24) 
Sec. 111-25. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers that may be received in the future by the city. The city does not subscribe to or contract with any consumer reporting agency at this time. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; or 
d.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information or a phone number that is inconsistent with external or internal information sources used by the city. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or external sources used by the city. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
f.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
g.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the city. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-25) 
Sec. 111-26. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the director of the department of utilities (DDU). If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to executive assistant to the director of the department of utilities (EA), who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the EA in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the EA: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer; 
(4)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(5)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the DDU. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the EA, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the EA in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a City employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the EA: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-26) 
Sec. 111-27. - Updating the program. 
The mayor and council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the mayor and council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-27) 
Sec. 111-28. - Program administration. 
The DDU is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the mayor and council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The DDU will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. 
(2)  The DDU and the EA are responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The DDU and the EA shall exercise their discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-28) 
Sec. 111-29. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the DDU shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-29) 
Sec. 111-30. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-30) 
Sec. 111-31. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
In the event that the city uses the services of a consumer reporting agency and the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-31) 
Sec. 111-32. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-32) 
Secs. 111-33—111-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER, SEWER, AND GARBAGE SERVICE 

Sec. 111-55. - Water and sewer service area. 
The city water and sewer service area shall be established by the mayor and council. The rules and regulations established by the city shall be enforceable to all portions of the water and sewer service area. No properties within the water and sewer service area shall be served by any other municipality or government entity, county government, or private water and/or sewer entity. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-55) 
Sec. 111-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Increasing block or tiered rate structure means a rate structure that increases as water usage increases. The city's tiered water rate structure consists of three tiers as defined by the mayor and council. 
Uniform rate structure means a water or sewer rate structure that neither increases nor decreases with increased water or sewer usage. Under this rate structure, the city will charge a uniform rate for every gallon of water or sewer purchased by a customer. 
Wholesale water user's agreement means an agreement entered into by the mayor and council with a customer who uses a large volume of water that provides the customer with a wholesale water rate. This agreement may define a minimum annual water volume to be purchased by the customer and the methodology to be used by the city to raise the rate during the term of the contract such as but not limited to the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) for the Atlanta region or the Municipal Cost Index (MCI) as published in the American City and County Magazine. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-56) 
Sec. 111-57. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  The water, sewer, and garbage rate schedule for the city is as set forth in section 12-111 and may be changed without notice by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The rate schedule contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling or a single business or commercial unit. Each individual residential or commercial unit shall be metered. For example, an apartment unit or a commercial strip-mall with seven individual units shall have seven individual water meters. In cases where the city deems that individual meters for each unit are not feasible, a master meter may be permitted and each individual unit shall be sub-metered by the owner. In addition, each individual residential or commercial unit within a complex shall be charged a minimum monthly water, sewer, and garbage fee plus additional charges per 1,000 gallons of usage above established minimums. 
(c)  Residential water rates shall be based on an increasing block or tiered rate structure. Commercial water and sewer and residential sewer rates shall be based on a uniform rate structure. 
(d)  A surcharge as stated in section 12-111 will be levied on all sewer users discharging pollutants into the city's sewer system if these pollutants have a concentration greater that those listed in article V of this chapter regarding sewer use. Surcharges are established by the city and are charged per pound of each pollutant that is discharged into the city's sewer system above established "normal wastewater" levels. The city levies fines against those sewer users who violate the established maximum allowable concentrations of these pollutants. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-57) 
Sec. 111-58. - Application for water, sewer, and garbage service. 
(a)  Each customer shall make application for water, sewer, and garbage service, in person at the department of utilities at city hall or via the telephone with a department of utilities customer representative. 
(b)  A cash security deposit for water service as stated in section 12-111 shall be charged to both commercial and residential customers. 
(c)  The customer shall complete an approved service application form and submit the completed form to the city. 
(d)  If the director of utilities determines that the customer is potentially a high water user, the customer shall make a cash security deposit equaling two months of his estimated water and sewer bill. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-58) 
Sec. 111-59. - Charges for initial water and sewer connections. 
(a)  Water connections. Each single-unit residential unit subscribing to use water service shall pay a water meter fee as stated in section 12-111. Each multi-unit residential unit, who has been given permission by the department of utilities to utilize a master meter, and each commercial customer subscribing to use water service shall pay a water capacity fee as stated in section 12-111, plus the cost of the master meter components and installation. Once a water meter is assigned to a specific piece of property, the meter runs with the property and must be transferred with the property to any subsequent purchaser. 
(b)  Sewer connections. Each customer subscribing to use sewer service shall pay a sewer capacity fee as stated in section 12-111 plus the cost of connecting to the sewer system. For single-family and multifamily residential, the fee shall be per residential unit; for commercial, the fee shall be per gallon of estimated monthly water usage, and for industrial including hospitals, the fee shall be per gallon per day of maximum daily water usage. The minimum usage per residential, commercial, or industrial unit shall not be considered less than 250 gallons per day. As set forth in the sewer capacity purchase agreement, once sewer capacity is assigned to a specific piece of property, the capacity runs with the property and must be transferred with the property to any subsequent purchaser. Sewer capacity can not at any time be transferred from one parcel of land to another parcel of land. The city reserves the right to deny a request for sewer capacity based on the availability of the capacity in the treatment facilities and the sewage conveyance system. 
(1)  Sewer capacity purchase agreement. The sewer capacity purchase agreement is an agreement that describes the name of the property owner requesting sewer capacity, the quantity of capacity in gallons per day sold by the city to the property owner, the cost of the capacity, and the land to which the sewer capacity is assigned. The agreement must be accompanied by a legal description of the property for which the sewer capacity is to be purchased and a perimeter survey of the property. 
(2)  Sewer capacity assignment document. The sewer capacity assignment document is an agreement that describes the name of the sewer capacity/property owner, the quantity of capacity originally purchased from the city, the quantity of capacity available to the property owner for assignment, and the quantity of capacity to be used or assigned (in essence subdivided with the land). The sewer capacity assignment must be accompanied by a legal description of the property to which the sewer capacity is to be assigned and a perimeter survey of the property. 
(3)  Sewer capacity repurchase agreement. The sewer capacity repurchase agreement is an agreement used by the city to repurchase sewer capacity from a sewer capacity/property owner who purchases more capacity than was needed for development of the subject parcel of real property. Once capacity has been assigned to a parcel of property and that parcel has been fully developed, a repurchase of sewer capacity will be denied. However, if the parcel remains less than fully developed due to economic conditions, zoning constraints, or if the quantity of subparcels/lots is reduced from the original city-approved site plan to a new city-approved site plan, the city may consider a repurchase or a partial repurchase upon application by the property owner on a form provided by the city utilities department. The city will determine whether or not the sewer capacity/property owner is eligible for repurchase and the amount of capacity subject to repurchase based upon the following factors: the need for sewer capacity for the subject parcel based upon anticipated present and future use, engineering factors, the sewer master plan, best management practices (including, but not limited to, the existing sewage conveyance system and wastewater treatment plant capacity), whether the proposed repurchase will be followed by a resale of sewer capacity in the city service area to the same or a related entity and any other factors that are reasonably related to the sewer system in making its decision to grant or deny the repurchase. If the city makes the decision to repurchase any sewer capacity, the repurchase will be at no more than the original sales price paid to the city by sewer capacity/property owner or its predecessor(s) in title less administrative costs of $500.00 and title search fees of $300.00 or such other amounts as may be set by the council by resolution from time to time. All repurchase decisions shall require the written approval of the mayor, city administrator and the utilities director. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-59) 
Sec. 111-60. - Maximum service height elevations. 
(a)  Individuals requesting water service at elevations in excess of 1,280 feet MSL shall be responsible for designing and constructing pumping systems and water storage facilities for their development that meets fire flow requirements for all system conditions and the as per city requirements. 
(b)  The design, construction, and maintenance costs of such pumping systems and water storage facilities will be the responsibility of the developer, home owner's association, and shall not be the responsibility of the city. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-60) 
Sec. 111-61. - Minimum monthly charges. 
The minimum monthly charge, as provided in section 12-111, shall be made for such connection or service subscribed for. Water, sewer, or garbage service furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only, and except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water, sewer, or garbage services free of charge to anyone. Each individual residential or commercial unit shall be metered. Unmetered water taken without permission from the city shall be considered theft of services and punishable under applicable law. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-61) 
Sec. 111-62. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extension of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the customer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the customer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions, the customer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-62) 
Sec. 111-63. - Customer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the customer, members of his household, household guests, and employees only. The customer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use their water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection or other purposes except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the service area. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall establish outdoor watering bans and watering schedules at times and intervals they deem necessary in order to protect the public water supply or to encourage water conservation practices. Failure to comply with watering bans or watering schedules and times shall constitute a violation of this section and is punishable by fines of up to $1,000.00 per day per offense or loss of water and sewer service. 
(c)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a customer, a suitable place shall be provided by the customer that is unobstructed and accessible at all times to duly authorized agents of the city. 
(d)  The customer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the customer's side of the meter. 
(e)  The customer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the customer at the customer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. All water leaks on the customer's side of the meter are the responsibility of the customer. 
(f)  In order to be received as a customer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system; and all applicants, by becoming customers of the city, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be customers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(g)  All disposal of septic tank waste by septic tank contractors in the city sewer system is absolutely prohibited, except as provided for in section 111-132. Anyone who violates this provision may be fined a maximum of $1,000.00 for each occurrence, as determined by the mayor and council. 
(h)  All sewer use is governed by article V of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-63) 
Sec. 111-64. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the customer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with water service and its facilities, and sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the customer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city an easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-64) 
Sec. 111-65. - Change of occupancy and other customer service provisions. 
(a)  Termination of service. The customer shall alert the city of the customer's intent to terminate service by submitting a service termination form to the city via facsimile, email, or in person at city hall along with a copy of an acceptable form of picture identification. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed, sewer used, and garbage service utilized up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. 
(b)  Establishing service. A new occupant shall apply for water service immediately upon occupying the premises. Failure to do so will make the new occupant liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. The city shall not be held liable for damage incurred by turning a water meter on to a residence or commercial unit. The owner shall be responsible for ensuring that all fixtures are in the "off" position before requesting that a water meter be turned on. Each customer shall complete and submit to the city, either a residential or commercial water service form, a copy of an acceptable form of picture identification, and proof of ownership of the premises (deed) or a lease or rental agreement. A deposit must be submitted to the city in the amount established in section 12-111. 
(c)  Suspension of service. A customer's service can be suspended by the customer upon the customer submitting a completed service suspension or "snowbird" status form to the department of utilities. During the time the account is suspended, the water meter will be turned off and locked and the customer will not receive a bill. The customer should contact the city to restore service. 
(d)  Change of address. a customer's mailing address may be changed by submitted a change of address form along with an acceptable form of picture identification. 
(e)  Auto-draft of bank accounts. The city provides auto-draft services to customers upon request. An automatic payment authorization form must be completed and submitted to the city along with an acceptable form of picture identification. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-65) 
Sec. 111-66. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water, sewer, and garbage service shall be mailed out on such day of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid to the department of utilities at city hall. Failure on the customer's part to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the customer from payment of the bill. The failure of water, sewer, and garbage users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Failure to pay a bill before or by the due date will subject the customer's account to a late charge established by the city in section 12-111. 
(2)  Once a bill be comes delinquent and is 60 days or more past due, water service to the customer's premises will be shut off. Balances over the maximum allowed in section 12-111 on delinquent accounts will result in loss of water service until the balance is paid in full and a reconnection fee is paid. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement; and if so, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(4)  A returned check fee shall be added to the customer's account as established in section 12-111. 
(5)  An internet service charge fee shall be added to those payments received via the city's on-line payment system. 
(6)  A credit card usage charge shall be added to all credit card payments. 
(7)  An automatic draft charge shall be added to all automatic credit card and automatic checking account drafts. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made, and a reconnection fee as stated in section 12-111 is paid for each meter reconnected. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-66) 
Sec. 111-67. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  When a customer who is renting or leasing property vacates the premises and has paid a security deposit, and once water, sewer, and garbage service is discontinued and all bills paid in full, the security deposit shall be refunded to the customer by the city. Typically, the deposit is applied to the final bill before a refund is made to the customer. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the customer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city shall proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  For failure to pay a water, sewer, or garbage bill. 
(2)  For failure to comply with pretreatment requirements, standards, or permits or an order from the director. 
(3)  For failure to properly install and maintain a grease interceptor as per city regulations. 
(4)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(5)  For customer's willful disregard of the city's rules and regulations, including but not limited to watering bans, sewer discharge limitations, and maintenance requirements. 
(6)  Emergency repairs. 
(7)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(8)  Legal processes. 
(9)  Direction of public authorities. 
(10)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-67) 
Sec. 111-68. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the customer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person or via the telephone, to the department of utilities at city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claims, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service. The customer may pay such bill under protest, and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a customer for a fee as provided in section 12-111; however, if such special reading discloses that the meter was over read, no fee will be charged. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the customer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; however, if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the customer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(e)  A customer may request an adjustment to an unusually high water bill that has resulted from a leak. The customer must, at a minimum, provide a receipt for the repair work performed. Alternately, if the customer performs the work himself, the customer must provide receipts for parts and fixtures purchased to perform the required repair. In either case, the customer must show that the leak has been repaired before an adjustment can be given. 
(f)  Adjustments are limited to one adjustment per year and are given at the discretion of the city. 
(g)  Typically, an adjustment consists of forgiving on-half of the customer's water bill total that is above the customer's average monthly bill. 
(h)  The customer may appeal a decision made by the billing division regarding water leak adjustments to the director of utilities in writing. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-68) 
Sec. 111-69. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Fraudulent use. Evidence of the existence of a bypass, the bypassing of water around meters, or the unauthorized piping or selling of water, or any other use of unmetered water except for the fire extinguishing purposes shall be deemed fraudulent use. 
(b)  Tampering. All curb stop/curb shutoff valves, hydrants, meters, valves, or other property of the city shall not be opened, closed, or tampered with in any way by any person not authorized to do so by the city. Moving meters from lot to lot is strictly prohibited and punishable by fine or loss of water service. When the city determines that the serial number on the meter at a specific address does not match the serial number on the meter assigned to that address, the city will consider that the meter was stolen and will require the owner to purchase a new meter at the then current new meter cost. Stolen, damaged or moved meters will result in the owner being charged 100 percent of the cost of a new meter of the same size and type. 
(c)  Cross connections. No cross connection shall be permitted between the public water supply and any other water supply, or between the public water supply and any plumbing fixture, device, or appliance capable of contaminating the public water supply unless the connection is protected at the metering point by a backflow prevention device as required by this article. The connection shall be approved by the department of utilities and shall satisfy the laws of the state and applicable building and plumbing codes. 
(d)  Electrical ground wires. No ground wires from any source whatsoever shall be attached to any water pipe inside or outside the premises served that does not meet the requirements of the building code. 
(e)  Fees and expenses. 
(1)  Tampering. Any damage to the curb stop/curb shutoff valve, hydrants, meters, meter boxes, radio-read equipment, or other property of the city which the city determines is caused by tampering caused by the customer, customer's employees, contractors, or agents or other utilities shall be repaired by the city at the customer's expense. Such tampering may result in the city charging the customer the full cost of a new meter. Tampering or threatening to tamper with any water or sewer facility or any appurtenance may be considered an act of terrorism which is punishable under applicable federal law. 
(2)  Fraudulent use. Upon discovery by the Department of Utilities of fraudulent use by a customer, the customer shall be charged not less than double rates for such quantities of service as the city shall estimate to have been fraudulently used. 
(3)  Accidents. City property (hydrants, meters, manholes, valves, water lines, sewer lines, force mains, pumping stations, appurtenances, etc.) that is damaged by automobile accidents, construction accidents, or other types of accidents shall be repaired by the city at the perpetrator's expense. 
(4)  Water meter construction damage. In the case of new construction, water meters that are damaged by construction activity shall be the sole responsibility of the purchaser of the water meter. If the water meter is damaged, the city will charge the purchaser 100 percent of the cost of a new meter at the then current rate. 
(5)  Stolen water meters. In the case of new construction sites, a stolen water meter shall be sole responsibility of the developer and not the city. If a water meter is stolen from a construction site, the developer shall be responsible for purchasing a new water meter at the then current city new water meter price. Water meters that are moved from one lot in a development to another lot within the development without written permission from the city will be considered a stolen meter and the owner shall be responsible for purchasing a new meter at the then current new meter price. This requirement shall not apply to an individual home owner. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-69) 
Sec. 111-70. - Theft of services. 
Taking water from the city water system without prior written consent from the city constitutes theft of services and shall be punishable under applicable law. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-70) 
Sec. 111-71. - Hydrants. 
(a)  Prohibited use. Public or private hydrants shall not be used for any purpose other than to extinguish fires or for such other purposes as may be authorized by the city. In no cases shall hydrants or any adaptor installed on a hydrant be operated by any person other than the city or its duly authorized agent. 
(b)  Permitted use. Hydrant permits may be issued by the city on a case-by-case basis for such activities as road construction, filling swimming pools, dust control, and other activities permitted by the city. All water used by the permittee must flow through a city-issued hydrant meter with backflow prevention device and the permittee must pay the city for water used at the most current commercial water rates. A deposit on the city-issued hydrant meter will be required. 
(c)  Fire flow tests. The city requires that fire flow tests be performed by a licensed professional engineer prior to approval of a proposed development so that the city can determine what system improvements are needed to provide adequate fire flow for the development. Final plat fire flow tests are required prior to approval of the final plat so that the developer can certify that the development has adequate fire flow before a certificate of occupancy is issued. No combustible materials will be permitted on-site until system improvements are complete and fire flows are deemed to be adequate for the site. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-71) 
Sec. 111-72. - Construction improvements and system expansion. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All construction improvements and system expansion projects must meet the minimum requirements of the following city design manuals: 
(1)  All water system improvements must meet the requirements of the most current version of the Manual of Technical Specifications and Construction Standard Details for the City of Cumming Water Distribution System and must be reviewed by the director of utilities or his designee. In addition, certain larger system expansions and improvements may require review and approval of the city's contract engineer and Georgia EPD. 
(2)  All sewer system improvements must meet the requirements of the most current version of the Manual of Technical Specifications and Construction Standard Details for the City of Cumming Wastewater Collection System and the Manual of Technical Specifications and Construction Standard Details for the City of Cumming Wastewater Pumping Stations and must be reviewed by the director of utilities or his designee. In addition, certain larger system expansions and improvements may require review and approval of the city's contract engineer and Georgia EPD. 
(3)  When water lines are installed along road frontage, the city requires that such lines be installed along the road frontage from property line to property line, just outside of the road right-of-way. When sewer lines are installed in a development within a given drainage basin or basins, the sewer line(s) must be installed so that sewer generated by properties higher in the basin can flow through property lower in the basin. This must be verified by the director of utilities and must be constructed according to the requirements of the city water master plan and sewer master plan. 
(b)  Detailed plan submission. Detailed plans for all proposed construction improvements and system expansion projects must be submitted to the department of utilities for review. Larger water mains and larger sewage collection system improvements shall be submitted to the city's contract engineer for review as per Georgia EPD requirements for delegation of authority for plan review. All water main sizes shall be approved by the city. 
(c)  Development. No development shall impact the quality, quantity, pressure, or flow of water available to existing users. If the city determines that a development will or has negatively impacted the water system, the owner of that development shall make such system improvements that adequate pressure and flow is restored to all users of the system. All proposed developments must demonstrate that they will meet the minimum fire flow requirements of the city while maintaining adequate pressures in all other segments of the system. 
(d)  Funding. Unless otherwise funded by the mayor and council, all water and sewer system improvements must be designed and constructed at no cost to the city and such system improvements must be dedicated to the city upon completion and acceptance by the mayor and council. 
(e)  Existing developments. In cases where existing developments require connection to the city's water supply or require a larger water main with fire hydrants, the city may work on a case-by-case basis with the property owners on a payment plan. 
(f)  Connection requirements. In general, no proposed or new development within the city's water and sewer service area shall be connected to a private well or septic system. All proposed developments shall connect to the public water and sewer system and shall make all necessary system improvements required to provide water and sewer service to the development at no cost to the city. 
(1)  Extreme cases. In extreme cases, the city may determine that a proposed development or single-family structure is too small to justify infrastructure improvement costs. In extreme cases, the city may permit the use of septic tanks and/or wells, but only for small developments and with the understanding that the development or single-family unit will be connected to city water and sewer once facilities become available. 
(2)  City-metered water required. No development or individual unit shall be connected to sanitary sewer unless the development or individual unit is also connected to the public water system with a viable city-approved water meter. 
(g)  Private wastewater systems. No development shall be connected to a private wastewater treatment facility other than those owned and operated by the city. If a development refuses to connect to the city's sewage system and plans to connect to a private wastewater treatment facility, the city will not allow that development to connect to the public water system. 
(h)  Master plans. All proposed developments within the city water and sewer service area shall comply with the most current version of the city water and sewer master plans. 
(1)  All owners of proposed developments shall design water and sewer infrastructure so that the components provide maximum benefit to the basin in which they are installed. 
(2)  In cases where sanitary sewer is not feasible, and to satisfy the requirements of the Georgia EPD and other regulatory agencies, dry sewer lines will be required in new developments so that the development can be easily converted to sanitary sewer once it becomes available in the basin. 
(i)  Adjoining properties. All proposed developments must provide water and sewer easements to all adjoining properties at no cost to the city. In some cases, the city may require that a line or lines be installed in the easement up to the common property line with adjoining properties. 
G)  Easements. Typical permanent water and sewer easements are 20 feet wide and are dedicated to the city. Typical temporary construction easements are an additional 20 feet wide, usually configured ten feet on either side of the 20-foot permanent easement. All water and sewer easements must be conveyed to the city using city-approved easement documents. All easements that are proposed to be conveyed to the city must be accepted by the mayor and council. 
(k)  Minimum pipe sizes. The minimum allowable water main size with fire hydrants shall be eight inches. The minimum allowable gravity sewer line size shall be eight inches. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-72) 
Sec. 111-73. - Standards for outdoor watering of landscape and potable water waste. 
(a)  Scope. This section shall apply to customers of the city water or sewer service. "Customer" is defined as any person, association, corporation, or other entity receiving city water or sewer service in the service area. 
(b)  Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(6)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(c)  Prohibition on potable water waste. Other than as set forth in subsection (d) below, the following uses are a waste or unreasonable use or method of use of potable water and are prohibited: 
(1)  Intentionally allowing potable water to escape from any premises onto a public right-of-way such as streets and sidewalks, or upon any other person's property. 
(2)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device during any form of precipitation. 
(3)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device that has any broken or missing sprinkler heads. 
(4)  Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, or a leaking valve, or a leaking outdoor faucet, or a service line leak, or any other visible outside water leaks, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, within 30 days or sooner if deemed necessary by the director. 
(d)  Exceptions on potable water waste. The restrictions in subsection (c) do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities; 
(2)  Water applied as a dust control measure; 
(3)  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, where water is the appropriate methodology; 
(4)  Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available; 
(5)  Flow resulting from routine inspection, operation, or maintenance of traffic flow control devices; 
(6)  Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the application of water is appropriate methodology and where no other practical alternative exists; 
(7)  Unintentional or de minimus overspray of an irrigation system or landscape watering devises whether hand held or a temporary or permanent sprinkler system. 
(e)  Car washes. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, have the meaning defined in this section: 
Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
(2)  [ Recycled water systems. ] All commercial conveyor car washes must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50% of water utilized will be recycled. 
(3)  [ Exceptions. ] The provisions of subsection (e)(2) above do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(2)  The city department of utilities shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The mayor may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation returnable to the city court or by any other legal means as set forth by City Code. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-73) 
Secs. 111-74—111-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 111-103. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acceptable entry conditions means the conditions that must exist in a permitted space to allow entry and to ensure that employees involved with a permit required confined space entry can safely enter into and work with the space. 
Approved means accepted by the director of utilities or his designee as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation, or as suitable for the purpose used. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply, on or available, to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. 
Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution piping of the potable water supply. 
Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or backsiphonage. Backflow preventers are most commonly categorized as air gap, reduced pressure principal device (RPZ), double check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bib vacuum breaker, residential dual check valve, double check valve with atmospheric vent, and barometric loop. 
(1)  Air gap means a physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any other system; physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one inch. 
(2)  Atmospheric vacuum breaker means a device which prevents backsiphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure or sub atmospheric pressure in a water system. 
(3)  Barometric loop means a fabricated piping arrangement rising at least 35 feet at its topmost point above the highest fixture it supplies. It is utilized in water supply systems to protect against backsiphonage. 
(4)  Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating spring-loaded check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located cocks for the testing of each check valve. 
(5)  Double check valve with intermediate atmospheric vent means a device having two spring-loaded check valves separated by an atmospheric vent chamber. 
(6)  Hose bib vacuum breaker means a device which is permanently attached to a hose bib and which acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker. 
(7)  Pressure vacuum breaker means a device containing one or two independently operated spring-loaded check valves and an independently operated spring-loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check or checks. Such device includes tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves. 
(8)  Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer means an assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check valves with automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves, tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the relief valve. 
(9)  Residential dual check valve means an assembly of two spring-loaded, independently operating check valves without tightly closing shutoff valves and test cocks. Such assembly is generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a containment device. 
Back-pressure means a condition in which the owner's system pressure is greater than the city's system pressure. 
Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
City-owned and operated backflow preventer means a backflow preventer that may also be installed by the city on a water service line that is owned and operated by the city. The presence of a city-owned and operated backflow preventer does not excuse a customer from meeting the requirements of the city to install a separate back flow preventer that must be maintained by the customer. 
Confined space means a space that: 
(1)  Is large enough and so configured that an employee can bodily enter and perform assigned work; 
(2)  Has limited or restricted means for entry or exit (for example, tanks, vessels, silos, storage bins, hoppers, vaults and pits are spaces that may have limited means of entry); and 
(3)  Is not designed for continuous employee occupancy. 
Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow preventer at the at the water service entrance. 
Contaminant means a substance that will impair the quality of a water supply to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to poisoning, the spread of disease, or death if ingested. 
Cross connection means any actual or potential connection between the public water supply and a source of contamination or pollution. Potential contaminants include but are not limited to: industrial fluid, chemicals, gas, sewage, well water, irrigation water, reuse water, lawn chemicals, or other substance. 
Customer means the owner, renter, or lessee of residential, commercial, industrial or government facilities receiving water service from the city water system. 
Degree of hazard means the inherent ability of a substance to do harm, cause illness, spread disease, or cause death due to its toxicity, corrosiveness, flammability, or other characteristic, and the potential for that substance to come into contact with persons or the environment. The city determines the degree of hazard posed by a connection to the city water system based on the potential of substances on the customer's premises to contaminate the city's water system due to a backflow situation and affect the health and welfare of its customers. 
Department means the city department of utilities. 
Director means the director of the city department of utilities, or a duly authorized representative invested with the authority for the implementation of a cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Fixture isolation means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow preventer is located to correct a cross connection at an in-plant location rather than at a water service entrance. 
Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination to the public potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
Owner means any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or habitate in, a property upon which a cross connection inspection is to be made or upon which a cross connection is present. 
Permit means a document issued by the department which allows the use of a backflow preventer. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
Pollutant means foreign substance that, if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a moderate hazard, or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create and actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water for domestic use. 
Purveyor means a water supplier. 
Service connection means the point of delivery of water to a premises, normally at the location of the water meter. It is the end of the water purveyor's jurisdiction and the beginning of the customer's responsibility. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-103) 
Sec. 111-104. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to: 
(1)  Protect the public from potential hazards that could jeopardize health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Protect the public potable water supply served by the city department of utilities from the possibility of contamination or pollution by requiring city customer to isolate, within the customer's internal distribution system, such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the public water system. 
(3)  Eliminate or control existing and potential cross connections between the city's potable water system and other potable water systems or non-potable systems. 
(4)  Create and maintain an ongoing cross connection control program by requiring the proper installation and ongoing maintenance of appropriate backflow prevention devices. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-104) 
Sec. 111-105. - Authority. 
(a)  In accordance with the federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, the statutes of the state, and chapter 391-3-5.13 of the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water, the water purveyor has the primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources or any other substances, from entering the public potable water system. 
(b)  This article is adopted under the authority of the city department of utilities rules and regulations. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-105) 
Sec. 111-106. - General responsibility. 
(a)  Thermal expansion. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any premises to provide necessary protection against thermal expansion as needed and specified by relevant standards enforced by the city. 
(b)  Confined space. Customers shall comply with OSHA regulations codified at 29 CFR 1910.146, regarding permit-confined spaces. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-106) 
Sec. 111-107. - Department responsibility. 
(a)  The city shall provide an on-site evaluation in order to determine if a backflow preventer or if multiple backflow preventers will be required, and, if so, which type. 
(b)  A plan must be submitted to the city by the customer for all new installations of backflow preventers and the plan must be approved by the city prior to installation by the customer. 
(c)  All backflow preventers shall be installed according to and meet the requirements of the Manual of Technical Specifications and Construction Details for the City of Cumming Water Distribution System . 
(d)  The customer shall have all backflow preventers on their premises installed by a licensed plumber who is qualified in the State of Georgia to install backflow prevention devices. 
(e)  Once the backflow device has been installed and tested, the customer must contact the department of utilities for an inspection of the device before it can be placed into operation. 
(f)  For premises existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the city water system will perform evaluations and inspections of plant and/or premises and inform the customer by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of implementing the corrective action, and the time frame allowed for the correction to be made depending on the degree of hazard. 
(g)  The city will not allow any service connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be tested regularly to ensure satisfactory operation. 
(h)  The city shall inspect a customer's premises to determine compliance with this article and will provide written notice of violations and resulting fines to the customer. If a violation is discovered, the city will allow an additional seven days for the required corrective action to be completed. If the owner fails to complete the required corrective action at the time of the second inspection, the water service to the premises will be terminated. If the owner demonstrates to the city water system that extenuating circumstances existed that prevented completion of corrective action, a time extension may be granted by the city. However, in no case shall the extension exceed an additional 24 hours. 
(i)  If the city determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately. 
(j)  The director of utilities shall be responsible for administering the city cross connection control program for the city to protect the public potable water distribution system from contamination due to the backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants through a water service connection. If, in the judgment of the director of utilities, an approved backflow device is required, the director, or his delegated agent, shall give notice in writing to such customer to install an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his premises. The customer shall, within 90 days, install such approved device, or devices, at his own expense, and failure or refusal, or inability on the part of the customer, to install such device or devices within 90 days shall result in the loss of water service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-107) 
Sec. 111-108. - Commercial customer responsibility. 
(a)  All new water customers applying for service shall bring their premises into compliance with this article before the city will allow water service to be established. 
(b)  In general, all commercial customers shall install and maintain an RPZ backflow preventer on each water service line and the RPZ shall be installed prior to the point on the service line where water usage occurs including but not limited to a service line branch that supplies water to an irrigation system. RPZ devices must be installed above grade in a hot box. Steps should be taken to ensure that the device does not freeze during the winter months. 
(c)  In some cases, where the city determines that the degree of hazard or the potential for the customer to contaminate the public water supply is extremely low, the city may determine that a testable double check valve will suffice as the customer's backflow preventer. In either case, the responsibility for installing, testing, repairing, and reporting requirements lies with the customer. 
(d)  All commercial irrigation meters must be equipped with a city-approved RPZ backflow device and a rain sensor shutoff valve, both of which shall be installed, tested and maintained, and kept in good working condition by the customer and at no cost to the city. 
(e)  The commercial customer shall be responsible for the elimination of and protection from all internal cross connections on his/her premises. This requirement is for all internal processes that have the potential to cause contamination of the potable water supply inside a building (i.e., to keep chemicals used by the customer from contaminating the customer's drinking water). 
(f)  The commercial customer shall be responsible for ensuring that all water hoses, hose bibs, sinks and other devices connected to their internal water system both inside and outside of their facility are equipped with a proper vacuum breaker. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-108) 
Sec. 111-109. - Residential customer responsibility. 
(a)  The residential customer shall be responsible for ensuring that all water hoses, hose bibs, and sinks or other devices connected to their water system both inside and outside of their residence are equipped with a proper vacuum breaker. 
(b)  In most cases, the city will be responsible for the installation and periodic replacement of residential double check type backflow preventers at the meter. In most cases, residential backflow preventers will be installed or replaced by the city simultaneously with the water meter. The city's replaces water meters and backflow preventers typically once every ten to 15 years. 
(c)  All residential irrigation meters must be equipped with a city-approved RPZ backflow device and a rain sensor shutoff valve, both of which shall be installed, tested and maintained, and kept in good working condition by the customer and at no cost to the city. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-109) 
Sec. 111-110. - Fire vault and fire line backflow. 
(a)  All fire lines shall be equipped with a double detector check (DDC) as described in the Manual of Technical Specifications and Construction Details for the City of Cumming Water Distribution System . 
(b)  All DDCs shall be tested at least once annually by the customer and the test results reported to the city on a city-approved form. 
(c)  All fire vaults and DDCs must be maintained by the customer at no expense to the city. 
(d)  All DDCs must be equipped with a radio-read water meter as per city specification. 
(e)  Each fire vault must be locked at all times. All fire vaults locks must be keyed the same as the city's standard lock. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-110) 
Sec. 111-111. - Testing, reporting, and inspections. 
(a)  All backflow testing and re-testing shall be performed at no cost to the city. If a customer fails to have a device tested in a timely manner, the city may, at its discretion, test the device and charge the customer for the cost of the test plus administrative costs and all needed repairs. 
(b)  The customer shall have all backflow prevention devices on his/her premises tested by a state-certified backflow tester at least once annually, if not more frequently as required by the city. The results of such test(s) must be reported in writing to the city within seven business days of the customer receiving favorable results. 
(c)  If a backflow prevention device is found to be defective or if the device fails a test, the customer must report the failure to the city within 24 hours of the test and must have the device repaired or replaced immediately. A subsequent test must be conducted by the customer and the test results must be submitted to the city within 48 hours of the initial device failure. 
(d)  Test results shall be made to the city on a city-approved backflow test report form. All tests and repair records must be kept on-site and made available to city inspectors upon request. 
(e)  The customer's premises shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine the existence of cross connection, other structural or sanitary hazards, or violations of the article. 
(f)  Records of testing and repairs must be kept on the premises by the customer at all times and made available to the city upon request. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-111) 
Sec. 111-112. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  A written notice of noncompliance will be given, including a recommendation that will bring the customer into compliance within a specific time period. The time period will be determined based on the degree of hazard. 
(b)  Failure of compliance at the expiration of the specified time period may be subject to: 
(1)  Assessment of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per offense and/or termination of water, sewer, and garbage service; 
(2)  Issuance of a citation and summons to appear in court for each violation; and/or 
(3)  Termination of water, sewer, and garbage service until compliance has been achieved and all fines have been satisfied. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-112) 
Secs. 111-113—11-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 111-128. - Definitions. 
(a)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the following designated meanings: 

 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Aluminum sulfate (Alum) means an aluminum salt that is used as a coagulant in water treatment. Also used to remove phosphorous in wastewater treatment. Al 2 (S0 4 ) 3 •14H 2 0 
Ammonia (NH 3 ) means a colorless gaseous alkaline compound of nitrogen and hydrogen that is very soluble in water. 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation, the term "authorized representative of the user" means: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principle business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authorized to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, the term "authorized representative of the user" means a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility, the term "authorized representative of the user" means a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if: 
a.  The authorization is in writing; 
b.  The authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollution discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR parts 405—471. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water and wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen in milligrams per liter by weight consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. 
Chlorine means a chemical used to disinfect water and wastewater. Cl 2 in gaseous form, chlorine dioxide, sodium hypochlorite (bleach), or calcium hypochlorite (HTH). 
City means the governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the sewer system within the city water and sewer service area which includes those areas within the corporate city limits of Cumming, Georgia, and adjacent areas within unincorporated Forsyth County, Georgia. 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFRs) means those environmental regulations compiled by the federal government and found in 40 CFR. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Composite sample means the accumulation of a number of individual samples over a period of time, so taken as to represent the nature of the wastewater. 
Council means the mayor and council, which has jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the sewer system within the city water and sewer service area which includes those areas within the corporate city limits of Cumming, Georgia, and adjacent areas within unincorporated Forsyth County, Georgia. 
Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having, or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through said system. Said term shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) means the department of state government that is responsible for environmental protection and executes this responsibility through the Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
Director means the Director of the City of Cumming Department of Utilities, or a duly authorized representative. 
Director of utilities (director) means the Director of the Department of Utilities of the City of Cumming, Georgia or his representative. 
Discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the city's sewerage system from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b) and (c) of the Act. 
Dissolved oxygen (DO) means the molecular (atmospheric) oxygen dissolved in water or wastewater. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. Generally, permanent water and sewer easements are 20 feet wide and temporary easements are 40 feet wide. 
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) means the federal agency responsible for protecting the environment of the United States of America. 
Environmental Protection Division (Georgia EPD) means the division of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia that is responsible for the protection of the state's environment. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
Fats, oils and grease (FOG) and wax means fats, oils, grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not and substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0—65 degrees Celsius). 
Ferric chloride means an iron salt that is used as a coagulant in water and wastewater treatment. Fe(Cl) 2 
Ferric sulfate means an iron salt that is used as a coagulant in water and wastewater treatment. Fe 2 (S0 4 ) 3 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate from wastewater by treatment in an American Petroleum Institute (API) type of oil/water gravity separator. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Food service establishment means any restaurant, eatery, food caterer, cafeteria, or other institution processing and serving food such as motels, hotels, prisons, or schools. 
Food to microorganism ratio means a measure of food provided to bacteria in an aeration tank. F/M = [(Biochemical Oxygen Demand in lb/day)÷(Mixed Liquor Volatile Suspended Solids in lbs)] 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving, and sale of food or produce. 
Georgia 129 Priority Pollutants (GA129) means the list of 129 pollutants made up of volatiles, acids, base/neutrals, pesticides, metals, and others that are of concern to the State of Georgia in regard to the environment. 
Georgia In-stream Water Quality Standards (GAIWQS) means a listing of pollutants that may be present in waterways for which the State of Georgia has set concentration limitations. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream. 
Grease and oil means the group of substances with similar physical characteristics, which include fatty acids, soaps, fats, oils and any other material that can be solvent extracted and is not volatized during evaporation of the solvent. 
Grease trap or grease interceptor means a device primarily used in the food services industry for removal of oils, greases, and food solids from a process waste stream. In addition, the city may require an grease/oil/sand interceptor for other dischargers such as car washes. 
Hach Water Analysis Handbook means a water and wastewater laboratory analysis handbook that is published by the Hach Company, Loveland Colorado. Many of the specialized Hach analytical methods for the examination of water and wastewater are approved by the EPA. Hach Methods are designated by a Hach method Number (H.M.#). 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the county board of commissioners and their duly appointed assistants. 
Hydrogen sulfide H 2 S means a corrosive, explosive, flammable and colorless gas that is formed in anaerobic or septic wastewater and that occurs to some degree in all sewer systems. This gas smells like rotten eggs and is very poisonous to the human respiratory system. 
Industrial user means any source or nondomestic customer of the water and sewer department who produces industrial waste and discharges into the water pollution control facilities. 
Industrial wastewater means wastewater in which the solid, liquid, and gaseous wastes from process of industry, manufacture, trade, or business, or from the development or recovery of any natural resource (as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes) is found. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum pollutant concentration allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any grab or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes, operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory or regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations; section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Mass emission rate means the weight of material discharged to the POTW during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
Material safety data sheets (MSDS) means a document which provides the pertinent chemical makeup and characteristics of a substance or mixture. These documents are required to be made available to personnel that may come into contact with them. 
May is permissive (see "Shall"). 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, cultures and dialysis wastes. 
Micrograms per liter (μg/L) means a measurement of concentration (same as parts per billion- ppb). 
Milligrams per liter (mg/L) means a measurement of concentration (same as parts per million - ppm). 
Million gallons per day (MGD) means the quantity of gallons of water used or wastewater treated divided by 1,000,000 (e.g., 75,000 gallons per day ÷ 1,000,000 = 0.75 MGD). 
National categorical pretreatment standards means any national pretreatment standard specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to a water pollution control facility by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination Systems permit (NPDES permit) means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit issued to the city authorizing the discharge of advanced water reclamation facility effluent to the waters of the state. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm-sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source. 
(1)  The term "new source" means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting criteria of subsection (1)b or c above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Nitrates (N0 3 ) means a pollutant that is found in water and is a derivative of nitrogen ammonia. This pollutant is harmful to humans and especially to infants. In infants this pollutant can cause methemoglobinemia or "blue baby syndrome." 
Normal strength discharge or normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewer system which has a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) concentration less than or equal to 200 mg/L, an average concentration of total suspended solids (TSS) of not more than 220 mg/L, a chemical oxygen demand (COD) of not more than 500 mg/L, total phosphorus not more than eight mg/L, and total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) of not more than 40 mg/L. 
Parts per billion (ppb) means a measurement of concentration (same as micrograms per liter - μg/L). Since a liter of water weighs essentially 1,000,000,000 micrograms, a concentration of one μg/L is equal to one part per billion. 
Parts per million (ppm) means a measurement of concentration (same as milligrams per liter- mg/L). Since a liter of water weighs essentially 1,000,000 milligrams, a concentration of one mg/L is equal to one part per million. 
Pass through means the discharge from an industrial pretreatment facility which exits the city POTW and enters the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in standard units (SU). 
Phosphorus (P0 4 ) means total phosphorus expressed in terms of milligrams per liter. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, TKN, phosphorous, oil and grease, toxicity, odor, etc.). 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standard means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Privy or pit means a shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a fly-tight slab on which is securely located a fly-tight riser covered with hinged fly-tight seat and lid. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by a public authority. 
Publicly owned treatment works, POTW or sewage works means a "treatment works" as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out: and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to be inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be inadvertently present. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
Shall is mandatory (see also "May"). 
Significant industrial user (SIU) means: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, below: 
a.  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; 
b.  Any industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non- contact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater). Any industrial user that contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant. Any industrial user that is designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)). 
(2)  Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (l)b above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance (SNC) means a violation by an industrial user which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public). 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations that the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and which may, in the opinion of the director, adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain or storm-sewer means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Surcharge means a fee associated with the discharge of COD greater than 500 mg/L or TSS in excess of 220 mg/L or a TKN content in excess of 40 mg/L to the POTW. The fee is calculated based on the pounds of pollution discharged to the POTW. Any sample found to be in excess of 1,500 mg/L COD, or 500 mg/L TSS, or 100 mg/L TKN may be assessed a fine in addition to being surcharged. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtration as approved by EPA and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) means the total nitrogen as measured by the Kjeldahl technique, expressed in milligrams per liter by weight. 
Total toxic organics (TTO) means the list of regulated organic chemicals as specified by the USEPA. 
Toxic means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPD under the provision of the Clean Water Act, section 307(a), or other Acts. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and advanced water reclamation facility. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
Waste hauler means any individual, association, partnership, corporation, municipality, state, federal agency, or any agent or employee thereof that transports waste by vehicle. 
Wastewater means liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage (see also "water pollution control facility" or "advanced water reclamation facility"). 
Water pollution control facility (WPCF) means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage (see also "wastewater treatment facility" or "advanced water reclamation facility). 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-128) 
Sec. 111-129. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the sewage works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage works that will pass through the sewage works inadequately treated into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the sewage works; 
(3)  To protect sewage works personnel who may be affected by wastewater in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and biosolids from the sewage works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the sewage works; and 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements, and any other applicable federal or state laws. 
This article shall apply to all users of the city sanitary sewer system. This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits, provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-129) 
Sec. 111-130. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of the department of utilities shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director of utilities may be delegated to other city personnel. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-130) 
Sec. 111-131. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  All premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable wastes. No person shall dispose of human waste except in an approved toilet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(d)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(e)  The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city's jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way, in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(f)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer as may be permitted under this article; provided that, where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-131) 
Sec. 111-132. - Private wastewater disposal. 
The  following septic tank regulations for private sewer disposal shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction commenced after the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be connected to the public sewer when it is deemed available by the mayor and council. Subject to sewer availability, no on-site system (septic tank system) shall be permitted for new construction. Existing homes and other existing facilities served by septic tank systems at the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may remain being serviced by septic tank as long as it is not causing a public health problem as determined either by the city or the county health department. 
(2)  Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner, as determined by the city or the county health department, shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the city or the county health department. The city or the county health department may, at its discretion, require said facility to be connected to the public sewer, in which case, the connection shall be made within 30 days after receiving such notice. The septic tank must then be cleaned and filled with a suitable material at the owner's expense. 
(3)  All private wastewater disposal systems shall be permitted by the county public health department. 
(4)  The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(5)  Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system is regulated as follows. 
a.  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catch basin or other opening into the city sewerage system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewerage system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subsection (5)b. 
b.  Permits. The director is authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the director and under his supervision. Septic tank pumpage will not be accepted from areas outside the boundaries of the city water and sewer service area. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the director, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment process. 
c.  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks into the city's POTW and the total amount is due at the time of discharge. 
(6)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. The purchase of a city water meter and connection to the city's water system sewer system is requisite to connection to the city's sewer system. 
(7)  Those developers who wish to connect their development to a private wastewater treatment facility shall not be permitted to connect onto the city water system. 
(8)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(9)  All proposed developments shall comply with the city wastewater service policy. 
(10)  Grease interceptor regulations for private sewage disposal systems. See section 111-134(f). 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-132) 
Sec. 111-133. - Building sewers and connection. 
(a)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential service and for commercial and industrial service. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. A permit and inspection fee as specified in the City of Cumming Schedule of Water and Sewer Fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed. In addition to such building sewer permits, all significant industrial users shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit as described in this article. 
(b)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city supervision: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints may be required by the director where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the director. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirement of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the director. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight. Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C564. Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber "O"-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the director. 
(6)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth (0.1) foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the director. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
(j)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(k)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(l)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(m)  All pump stations in or contributing to the city's sewer system must comply with the requirements of the most current edition of the Manual of Technical Specifications Wastewater Pumping Stations and Force Mains for the City of Cumming Pump Station Requirements. 
(n)  If any house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the house sewer. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of wastewater treatment from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-133) 
Sec. 111-134. - Restricted use of the public sewers. 
(a)  Discharge of unpolluted waters. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm-sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the director. The discharge of cooling or condensing water will be allowed into a storm-sewer system provided an NPDES permit by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division is obtained from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(b)  Discharge of sanitary wastewater. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm-sewer system. All sanitary sewage and industrial process wastewaters shall be properly pretreated, if deemed necessary by the director, and discharged to an approved sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewage works any of the following described waters, wastes, pollutants, substances, or wastewaters if it appears likely, in the opinion of the director, that such wastes can harm the sewers, wastewater treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property or constitute a nuisance. 
(1)  Any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through the POTW or interference with the operation of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the sewage works whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Any pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the sewage works, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(3)  Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD 5 , etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the sewage works. 
(4)  Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 (or more than 9.0) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(5)  Any solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or resulting in interference; but in no case solids greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
(6)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(7)  Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; but in no case wastewater that contains 25 mg/L or more of the above mentioned oils or products. 
(8)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the sewage works in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(9)  Any septage, chemical toilet contents, industrial sludges or similar matter or materials, unless specifically authorized by the director through issuance of a permit pursuant to this article. 
(10)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(11)  Any substance that will cause the city's wastewater facilities to violate its NPDES permit or cause a violation of the water quality standards of the receiving waters. 
(12)  Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug." 
(13)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair. 
(14)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, (FOG) whether emulsified or not in excess of 100 mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0—65 degrees Celsius). 
(15)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of a garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(16)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(17)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, other objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the advanced water reclamation facility impacts the treatment works. 
(18)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances in concentrations which exceed limits that may be established by the director to protect the treatment works, protect the quality of sludge produced and/or meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies or jurisdictions for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(19)  Any radioactive waste or isotopes of such half-life concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(20)  Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, any textile fibers, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.) 
(21)  Any wastewater that imparts color that cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, that consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent. 
(22)  Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the advanced water reclamation facility effluent cannot meet the requirements of the city's NPDES Permit. 
(23)  Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(24)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a whole effluent toxicity test or Georgia 129 Priority Pollutant Scan. 
(25)  Any detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the sewage works. 
(26)  Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artisan well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(27)  Any pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by sections of this article shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be accidentally discharged to the sewage works. 
(d)  National categorical pretreatment standards/local limits. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6 (e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with CFR 403.15. 
(5)  Upon the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard for a particular pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The director shall notify all affected significant industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(e)  Local limits. The following table lists the local limits as derived by the city. These limits were based on the maximum head works loading acceptable to protect the receiving stream, activated sludge process, nitrification process, NPDES permit requirements, and "clean sludge" requirements of 40 CFR part 503. User discharge concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the sewage works. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following maximum allowable discharge limits: 
(1)  Maximum discharge limit. Maximum daily concentrations (mg/L, 24-hour composite) are as follows: 

 
The concentration limitations above are based on a specific mass limitation for each pollutant. The city may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration limitations above. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the sewage works. In addition, the city may enter into special agreements with industrial dischargers whereby the city allows higher discharge concentrations of the above described local limits as long as the maximum headworks loading to the POTW for any pollutant is not exceeded. 
(2)  "Normal" domestic wastewater concentrations, surcharge ranges, and maximum allowable concentrations for conventional pollutants. The following table lists concentrations for "normal" wastewater, concentration ranges used by the city for levying surcharges, and the maximum concentration allowed before a surcharge and a fine are levied by the city. 

 
(3)  More stringent standards or requirements established by the city. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the sewage works for the above mentioned conventional pollutants or any other pollutant discharged by a user. 
(4)  Authority of director. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewer and contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated above and, in the judgment of the director, have the potential to have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, sludge, or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
a.  Reject the wastes. 
b.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
c.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
d.  Designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers. 
e.  Require industrial users to relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge. 
f.  Require industrial users to separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams. 
g.  Require any person discharging into the sewage works to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
h.  Require surcharge payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this document and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the sewage works and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the facilities and equipment shall be subject to review and approval by same and shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(f)  Grease interceptor (grease trap) regulations. 
(1)  Grease interceptor required. All food service establishments discharging to the city's sewerage system (or to a private septic system when deemed necessary by the city) shall install, operate, and maintain a sufficiently sized grease and oil, water and solids separator (hereinafter called a grease interceptor) in order to achieve and maintain compliance with requirements set forth in this article. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(2)  Sizing. All grease interceptors required in this section shall be sized according to the following formulas. No single grease interceptor shall be smaller than 1,000 gallons or larger than 3,000 gallons. In certain cases, multiple grease interceptors may be utilized. More detailed design considerations are contained in the city's grease interceptor design manual. 
a.  Formula for restaurants. (S) × (GS) × (HR/12) × (LF) = grease interceptor capacity, in gallons where: S = numbers of seats in dining area, GS = gallons of wastewater per seat (use 15 gallons per seat); HR = numbers of hours open; LF = loading factor = 2.0 for Interstate freeways, 1.5 for other freeways, 1.25 for recreational areas, 1.0 for other highways. 
b.  Formula for hospitals, schools, nursing homes, other types of commercial kitchens with varied seating capacities. (M) × (GM) × (SC) × (LF) = grease interceptor capacity, in gallons where M = meals per day; GM = gallons of wastewater per meal (use five gallons per meal); LF = loading factor — 1.0 with dishwashing or 0.5 without dishwashing; SC = storage capacity factor — 1.0 for public sewer, 2.5 for on-site septic disposal. 
(3)  Maintenance. All grease interceptors shall be maintained by the user at the user's expense to be in continuously efficient operation. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, sludges, and solids. Decanting or backflushing of the grease interceptor of its contents for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled is prohibited. Practices such as "blow-and-go," "pump-and-dump," skimming, recycling, or other similar practices are also prohibited. Each food service establishment must have a maintenance contract with a private grease interceptor maintenance company, if required by the director. 
(4)  Frequency of maintenance. All grease interceptors must be pumped out completely once every 90 days. The director may, in writing, increase pumping frequency on a case-by-case basis based on actual observance. The director may issue a variance to the 90-day maintenance requirement and allow up to 365 days for certain low-volume grease producing establishments. In general, the establishments that qualify for a variance are limited to daycare centers, sandwich shops, coffee chops, churches, and ice cream shops. 
(5)  Additives. The use of any additive, such as enzymes, chemicals, or bacteria, prior to or in any grease interceptor is prohibited. 
(6)  Legal disposal. The user shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of the grease interceptor waste. All waste removed from each grease interceptor must be disposed of at a facility permitted by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division to receive such waste. In no manner shall any grease interceptor waste be discharged to the city's sewerage system, AWRF, or in a manner that would endanger the waters of the state. 
(7)  Manifests. The user shall be responsible for maintaining records (manifests) detailing the dates of service and quantity of waste removed. The manifest shall include the waste hauler company name, address, and telephone number and the driver's name. The manifest shall include the ultimate disposal facility company name, address, and telephone number and the person receiving the waste and the quantity of waste received. These records shall be subject to the city's review without prior notification. The city may require that these records be mailed or faxed to the city at the owner's expense. 
(8)  Grease interceptor maintenance company permits. All grease trap maintenance and waste hauling companies must obtain a permit from the city prior to conducting such activities in the city's sewer system. A permit fee set by the city must be paid and a background check on the grease interceptor maintenance company must be conducted before a permit can be issued. 
(9)  Grease, sand and oil separators. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. The grease, oil and sand separators shall be sized for proper operation at all times and shall be approved by the director. 
(10)  Car washes, equipment washes, and related facilities. All car washes, heavy equipment washing facilities and related facilities shall install a sand and oil separator as described above. In addition, if required by the director, all such facilities shall install a gray water recycling system as approved by the city. 
(g)  Industrial pretreatment facilities required. 
(1)  [ Compliance. ] Industrial users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in this document within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the city, whichever is more stringent. All facilities necessary for compliance with this article shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Prohibition of bypass. Upon reduction of efficiency of operation or loss or failure of all or part of the treatment facility, the permittee shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with its permit, control its production or discharges (or both) until operation of the treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies, for example, when the primary source of power of the treatment facility fails or is reduced. In some cases, it may be necessary for the industrial user to halt production at the production facility until the problem is corrected. 
(3)  Acceptable reasons for a bypass event. The director may approve an anticipated bypass event if he determines that the bypass event will not affect the city's sewer conveyance system, the wastewater treatment process at the POTW, the sludge or biosolids generated by the POTW, or the receiving stream. In addition, the director must determine whether or not the bypass will meet the four conditions (a, b, c, and d) listed below. In most cases, bypass events are prohibited and the city will take enforcement action against a user unless the following conditions are met: 
a.  The bypass event did not adversely affect the city's sewer conveyance system, the wastewater treatment process at the POTW, the sludge or biosolids generated by the POTW, or the receiving stream. 
b.  The bypass event was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
c.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass event, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or scheduling maintenance during normal periods of equipment down time. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment down time or preventive maintenance; and 
d.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (g)(5) of this section listed below regarding notification. 
(4)  Permitted bypass event. If approved by the director, a user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, and which does not adversely affect the city's sewer conveyance system, the wastewater treatment process at the POTW, the sludge or biosolids generated by the POTW, or the receiving stream. Permission for a bypass event will only be granted if it is deemed by the director that it is necessary for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation of the pretreatment facility. 
(5)  Notice of bypass. 
a.  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the user shall submit written notification to the city at least ten days before the date of the bypass and receive approval prior to the bypass. 
b.  An industrial user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards immediately upon becoming aware of the bypass. 
c.  A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass, including: 
1.  The exact dates and times of the bypass; 
2.  The exact cause and a description of the bypass; 
3.  The anticipated time the bypass is expected to continue, if it has not been corrected; and 
4.  Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass in the future. 
(h)  Mandatory certification. The operator in responsible charge of a wastewater treatment system and laboratory analysts performing laboratory tests in conjunction with the operation of a wastewater treatment system required by this document, must be certified in accordance with the rules of the Georgia State Board of Examiners for Certification of Water and Wastewater Operators and Laboratory Analysts. 
(i)  Control/observation manholes. See section 111-138. 
(j)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternately, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by this document; 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection of maintenance and storage areas for handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response; 
(5)  Posted notices required. Posted notice of procedures to be followed in the event of an accidental discharge or slug loading shall be provided by the user in the location of potential discharge problem areas, sewer drains, pretreatment facilities, or other areas required by the city. 
(k)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catch basin or other opening, into the city sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subsection (k)(2) hereof. 
(2)  Permits. The director is hereby authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the director and under his supervision. Septic tank pumpage will not be accepted from areas outside the boundaries of the city water/sewer service area. A map showing this service area is available from the city. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the director, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. In conjunction with permits, the hauler shall be required to pay an annual hauling permit fee set by the city. 
(3)  Waste haulers will be required to carry liability insurance, and provide evidence of same to the city, in such amounts and forms as determined by the city. Such insurance shall afford compensation for taking corrective action and for bodily injury, and for property damage to third persons caused by hauler negligence and/or accidents. 
(4)  The director may prohibit the disposal of hauled waste of unusual strength or character. No hauled waste shall be accepted that violates federal, state, or local regulations or threatens to cause the city's AWRF to violate its NPDES permit, violate state water quality standards, or contaminate its AWRF sludge. 
(5)  Samples of hauled waste are to be provided to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require industrial waste haulers to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(6)  Waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form (manifest) for every load. Forms shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names, addresses, and signature of each waste generator, and volume and characteristics of waste. For hauled industrial or commercial waste, the form shall identify the type of industrial or commercial establishment, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(7)  Waste haulers must provide prior notification to the director of the intent to discharge, and the actual discharge must be performed while supervised by wastewater treatment plant personnel. 
(8)  Waste haulers shall pay a waste hauler discharge fee as established by the city. 
(l)  Authority to accept industrial wastes. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the director for treatment. The industrial waste would be subject to surcharges levied on the industrial concern. No waiver of national categorical pretreatment standards shall be given for any reason. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-134) 
Sec. 111-135. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits required. 
(1)  All significant industrial users connected to, proposing to be connected to, or otherwise contributing to the sewage works shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a discharge permit from the city. Existing significant industrial users that have filed a timely application pursuant to this article may continue to discharge pursuant to subsection (b) below. 
(2)  The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the permittee to the sanctions set out in this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements of federal, state, or local law. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permitting—Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived except in accordance with the wastewater discharge permit issued by the director. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permitting—New connections; required application, fee. 
(1)  Proposed new significant industrial users shall apply, at least 90 days prior to connection to the sewage works, and shall obtain the permit prior to contributing to the system. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application in the form prescribed and furnished by the city. The director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following: 
a.  All information required by section 111-136(a)(2)a—h. 
b.  A description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility. 
c.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control. 
d.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production. 
e.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
f.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge. Plans must include detailed drawings of the pretreatment facility, a detailed description of the treatment process, and the exact location(s) of the treatment facility(ies). 
g.  Time and duration of discharges. 
h.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge application. 
i.  Details of systems and plans to prevent and control the loss of materials through spills to the public sewer system. 
(2)  An industrial pretreatment permit fee based on the amount of wastewater discharged to the system. This fee must be paid at the time the permit application is submitted and must be paid in full. At the time the permit expires, a new application and industrial pretreatment permit fee may be required by the city. 
(3)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(4)  The permit application should be completed and returned within 30 days of receipt of the permit application. 
(d)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for known violations." 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
(1)  The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
(f)  Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed three years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than three years at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. In additional, a wastewater discharge permit can be modified at any time by the director with 30 days written notice to the permittee. 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which duration shall not exceed more than three years. 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the director in accordance with this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards. 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law. 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such a schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges. 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW. 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit. 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article and federal and state laws, rules and regulations. 
(h)  Wastewater discharge permit appeals and modifications. 
(1)  The director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days notice of its issuance. 
a.  Failure to submit a petition for review, within the 30-day period, shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
b.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
c.  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
d.  If the director fails to act within 15 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(2)  The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons; 
a.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
b.  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance; 
c.  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge such as but not limited to a more restrictive NPDES permit; 
d.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
e.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
f.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting; 
g.  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR part 403.03; 
h.  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
i.  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(i)  Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if a permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the director and the transfer is approved. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing discharge permit. 
(j)  Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
(1)  The director may revoke a discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section 111-136(e) of this article; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or a discharge permit application. 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of permitted facility. 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the discharge permit or this article. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new discharge permit to that user. 
(k)  Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring discharge permit shall apply for a discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, not more than 90 days and not less than 60 days prior to the expiration of current permits. 
(l)  Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(1)  If another municipality or government entity, or user located within another municipality or government entity, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city shall enter into a multi-jurisdictional agreement with the contributing municipality or government entity. If at any time the city deems a discharge from a user, municipality, or other government entity to be harmful to the city's sewer system, advanced water reclamation facility, wastewater treatment facilities, or human health, the city shall have the power to terminate the discharge and/or plug the discharge line coming from the user, municipality, or other government entity. 
(2)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (l)(1) of this section, the director shall request the following information from the contributing municipality or government entity: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality or government entity; 
b.  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality or government entity that are discharging to the POTW; and 
c.  Such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
(3)  A multi-jurisdictional agreement, as required by subsection (l)(1) above, shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing municipality or government entity to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 111-134 of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
b.  A requirement for the contributing government entity to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
c.  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing government entity; which of these activities will be conducted by the city, and which will be conducted jointly by the contributing government entity and the city; 
d.  A requirement for the contributing government entity to provide the city with access to all information that the contributing government entity obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
e.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing government entity's discharge; 
f.  A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing government entity's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the director; and 
g.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the multi-jurisdictional agreement. 
(m)  Substitution for adequate treatment prohibited. The significant industrial user shall not increase the use of potable or process water or in any way attempt to dilute an effluent as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations of this article or the user's permit. The city may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is applicable. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-135) 
Sec. 111-136. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Baseline report of user. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that have become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2)a through e of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Submission of required information. Users described above shall submit the information described in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall submit the information set forth as follows: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous daily maximum, and long term average concentration or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (j) of this section. 
3.  Sampling must be analyzed in accordance with procedures set forth in subsection (j) of this section. 
f.  Certification. A statement reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
h.  Signature and certification. All base line monitoring reports must be signed by an authorized representative and certified in accordance with section 111-135(d). 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and conducting operation). 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the city no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in subsections (a)(1)d through f of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December) submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with this article. All monthly reports must be post marked no later than the 15th day of the month following the reporting period. Failure to collect samples, test, or furnish information in a timely manner shall be a violation of this article. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirements in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (k) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 111-135(c). 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 111-135(e) of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 111-135(h) in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the occurrence. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (f)(1) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from non-permitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director as the director may require. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If the sampling performed by the user indicates a violation the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to re-sample if the director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261, EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user; an identification of the constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass of constituents expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notification of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (e) of this section. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a), (c), and (d) of this section. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (i)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous waste, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes, as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharges of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(k)  Sampling collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (k)(2) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(l)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(m)  Record keeping. 
(1)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. 
(2)  The permittee shall retain records of all monitoring information, including all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all data used to complete the permittee's application, for a period of at least five years from the date of the sample, measurement, report or application. This period may be extended by the request of the director at any time. All records that pertain to matters that are the subject of special orders or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city shall be retained and preserved by the permittee until enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(3)  Records of sampling and analyses shall include: The date, exact place, time, and methods of sampling or measurements, and sample preservation techniques or procedure, who performed the sampling or measurements, the date(s) analyses were performed, who performed the analyses, the analytical techniques or methods used, and the results of such analyses. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-136) 
Sec. 111-137. - Powers and authorities of inspectors. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, independent sampling, testing, record review, and copying pertinent to discharge to the public sewerage system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to herein, the authorized employees or agents of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-137) 
Sec. 111-138. - Inspection, monitoring and entry. 
(a)  Inspection, monitoring, and entry. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director and all other duly authorized city personnel, employees, or agents will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  Manhole to observe, sample, and measure industrial wastewaters. All significant industrial users shall install a suitable control manhole or other suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structures shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The structure shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. Plans and/or drawings of this structure shall be approved by the director. The requirement for this structure may be waived if it is deemed by the director to be unnecessary. 
(3)  The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, metering, and/or observation of the user's operations. It shall be a violation of this article for any person or industrial user to tamper with, remove, adjust, disconnect, or otherwise interfere with the operation of these devices. 
(4)  The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary to conduct sampling, metering, and/or observation of the users operations. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a frequency deemed necessary by the director, to ensure accuracy. Records of this calibration must be submitted to the director upon request. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the city municipal court or the county magistrate court. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-138) 
Sec. 111-139. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. 
(1)  When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(2)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 403.14(b) will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(3)  All other information which is submitted to the state or POTW shall be available to the public at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR 2.302. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-139) 
Sec. 111-140. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The director shall publish annually in the city's legal organ a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. In addition, this list shall be publicized on the city's website. The term "significant noncompliance" means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, and oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants [including TKN, phosphorous, and COD] but does not include pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment of the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director exercising his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet within 90 days of the scheduled date a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting or completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the director determines will adversely affect the operation of implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-140) 
Sec. 111-141. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the director finds that a customer or user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that customer or user a written notice of violation. Within seven days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof to include specific required actions shall be submitted by the customer or user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the customer or user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in the section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The city is hereby empowered to enter into consent agreements, consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any customer or user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the customer or user to correct the noncompliance with a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The city may order a customer or user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the customer or user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the customer or user show cause why the proposed enforcement should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the customer or user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking other action against the customer or user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the city finds that a customer or user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the customer or user responsible for the discharge directing that the customer or user come into compliance within a specified time. If the customer or user does not come into compliance within the time provided, water and sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, device or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated and maintained. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the customer or user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the customer or user. 
(e)  Cease and desist order. 
(1)  When the city finds that a customer or user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the customer or user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the customer or user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the customer or user to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
b.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including, but not limited to, halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(2)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for taking any other action against the customer or user. 
(f)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the city finds that a customer or user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine such customer or user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average wastewater discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 15 days, be assessed an additional penalty of 12 percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of two percent per month. A lien against the customer or user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(3)  Customers or users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the customer or user's appeal is successful, the payment shall be returned to the customer or user. The director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the customer or user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions of wastewater discharge permits. The director may take whatever action may be deemed necessary and appropriate, including immediately suspending a customer or user's discharge, after informal notice to the customer or user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a customer or user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any customer or user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a customer or user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city may allow the customer or user to recommence its discharge when the customer or user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in (h) of this section are initiated against the customer or user. 
(2)  A customer or user responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrences, to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (c) of this section. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(h)  Termination of discharge and/or potable water supply. In addition to the provisions in section 111-135(j), any customer or user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge and/or potable water supply: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 111-134. 
(6)  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; 
(7)  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due. 
(8)  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(9)  Releases acids or chemicals into the public sewers that cause damage to or rapid deterioration of sewer lines, interfere with the treatment process, or interfere with the proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater. 
(10)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the city's wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and/or potable water supply and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c) of this section as to why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(i)  Recovery of costs incurred. In addition to civil and criminal liability, any person, customer, or permittee violating any of the provisions of their permit or the city utilities ordinance or causing damage to or otherwise inhibiting the city's wastewater disposal systems shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The city shall bill the customer or user for the costs incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed cost shall constitute a separate violation of subsection (f)(2) of this section. All cost of any additional or supplemental sampling or analyses required as a result of any customer's or user's excessive pollutant loadings such as BOD, suspended solids, floating oil and grease, Coliform bacteria, heavy metals, or priority pollutants as determined by the director or resulting from a user's suspected, regular or frequent violation of this article or a pretreatment permit shall be paid for by that user. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-141) 
Sec. 111-142. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition a court of competent jurisdiction, through the city attorney, for the issuance of temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate. Said temporary or permanent injunction shall restrain or compel the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement for the user to conduct environmental rededication. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000.00 per violation per day. In the case of monthly or other longterm average discharge limit violations, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court recorder fees, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(5)  All ordinance violations inside the city limits will be prosecuted in the city municipal court. All ordinance violations occurring outside the city limits shall be prosecuted in the county magistrate court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(4)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(5)  All ordinance violations inside the city limits will be prosecuted in the city municipal court. All ordinance violations occurring outside the city limits shall be prosecuted in the county magistrate court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-142) 
Sec. 111-143. - Service charges. 
(a)  Sewer service charge. 
(1)  Established. It is hereby determined to be necessary, in order to provide facilities for the protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and to comply with state and federal water quality laws and regulations for the protection of the quality of the waters of the state, to fix and collect charges upon all premises or facilities served by the water pollution control facilities of the city. 
(2)  Uses of proceeds. The revenue received from the collection of these charges, as hereinafter authorized, together with other revenue derived from the operation of the system and from the sale of water, shall be deposited with the chief financial officer and credited to the water and sewer revenue fund and shall be used for the operation and maintenance of the water pollution control and water purification systems and incidental expenses connected therewith; to pay debt requirements on revenue bonds issued; to provide funds for the planning, design, construction, improvement, repair and extension of the water pollution control and water purification systems, facilities and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of the systems; to acquire necessary easements or the purchase of land; and to provide funds for the necessary reserves for debt and improvements. 
(3)  Determination of amounts. For the purposes provided in subsection (a)(2) above, there is hereby charged and assessed to each premises or facility served by the water pollution control facilities of the city, or otherwise discharging wastewater, industrial wastes, water or liquids, either directly or indirectly into the water pollution control facilities, a sewer service charge and assessment payable as hereinafter provided, and in the amount determinable as follows: 
a.  The sewer service charge shall be based upon the quantity of water used by the premises or facility therein or thereon as measured by a water meter or meters there in use, or as otherwise currently established. 
b.  The sewer service charge shall consist of a charge per thousand gallons of water consumed, including adjustments thereto, plus the fixed costs. Rates shall be established for each customer class. 
c.  Water used from private sources shall be metered as required in subsection (d) of this section below and shall be figured at prevailing city rates and sewer service charges shall be billed accordingly. 
(4)  Independent water supply: installation of meter. In the event a lot, parcel of land, premises or facility discharging wastewater, industrial waste, water or other liquids, which either directly or indirectly enters into the city's water pollution control facilities, or ultimately enters the facilities, is supplied either in whole or in part with water from wells or any source other than the city, those wells or other source of supply shall be registered with the city on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and if not measured by a water meter, the owner or occupant shall, at his own cost, install and maintain a meter on the supplies in such a location and in such a manner as is satisfactory to the city. These meters shall serve as a control for the establishment of the sewer service charge and shall be read monthly or bi-monthly by employees of the city. 
(5)  Additional meters. Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the director that a significant portion of the water used by customers, as measured by the water meter or meters does not enter the water pollution control facilities, then that portion of water shall not be used for billing of the sewer service charge. The director may require or permit the installation of additional meters or other devices as may be deemed necessary to establish that portion which does not enter the system. 
(b)  Industrial waste surcharges. 
(1)  Established. All persons discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers shall be charged and assessed a surcharge, in addition to any sewer service charges, if these wastes have a concentration greater than the following: 
a.  A COD content of 500 mg/L as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
b.  A TSS content of 220 mg/L as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
c.  A TKN content of 40 mg/L as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
d.  A total phosphorous concentration of five mg/L as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in subsection (b) 2) of this section. 
e.  A biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ) concentration of 200 mg/L as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. This parameter may be used in lieu of COD as determined by the director. 
f.  A fats, oils and grease (FOG) concentration of 100 mg/L as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
g.  An ammonia nitrogen of 20 mg/L as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
h.  A chloride of 2025 mg/L as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
The amount of the surcharge, which is hereby charged and assessed against all persons discharging industrial wastewater into the public sewers, shall reflect the cost incurred by the city in handling the excess COD, TSS, TKN, phosphorous, BOD 5 , FOG, ammonia, and chloride. This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of charges for maintenance and operation of the water pollution control facilities including depreciation and other incidental expenses. 
(2)  Formula determining surcharge. When any or all the COD, TSS, TKN, phosphorous, BOD 5 , FOG, ammonia, and chloride concentrations of wastewater or waste accepted for admission to the city water pollution control facilities exceed the values of these constituents set forth in subsection (b)(1) above, the excess concentrations of any or all, as the case may be, shall be evaluated in terms of these values and be subject to a surcharge on the amount derived in accordance with the following formula: 
Amount of surcharge = (COD 1 + COD 2 + COD 3 + COD 4 + TSS 1 + TSS 2 + TSS 3 + TSS 4 + TKN 1 + TKN 2 + TKN 3 + TKN 4 + PHOS 1 + PHOS 2 + PHOS 3 + PHOS 4 + BOD 1 + BOD 2 + BOD 3 + BOD 4 + FOG 1 + FOG 2 + FOG 3 + FOG 4 + Amon 1 + Amon 2 + Amon 3 + Amon 4 + Chlor 1 + Chlor 2 + Chlor 3 + Chlor 4 ) 
Where: 

 
Where cost factors are as follows: 

 
(3)  Determination of amounts. The rates of surcharge for each of the aforementioned constituents shall be determined annually by the director in order that the above factors may correctly represent current treatment costs. A schedule of the surcharges shall be as established in section 12-111. 
(4)  Changing industrial waste surcharge. The industrial waste surcharge cost factors (cost per pound of removal) may be changed by the mayor and council without notice. 
(5)  Schedule of fees, surcharges, and fines. Waste hauler permit fees, grease hauler permit fees, industrial user permit fees, and wastewater surcharges and fines shall be established in section 12-111. 
(c)  Billing procedure. Industrial wastes surcharges provided for in this article shall be prepared and rendered to the address supplied by the director. The volume of flow used in billing the industrial waste surcharges shall be based upon metered, estimated, or prorated water consumption as shown in the records of meter reading maintained by the city. 
(d)  Payment of bills. Sewer service charges and surcharges provided in this article shall be payable at city hall or at other authorized locations, at the same time as the water bills for a lot, parcel of land, building, premises or facility are payable and payments for water shall not be accepted unless payment of the sewer service charge or surcharge is made at the same time, provided, however, that sewer service and/or surcharge is applicable. 
(e)  Annual analysis. 
(1)  Frequency of analysis. The industrial wastewater of each industrial user subject to the industrial waste surcharge, and discharging into the city sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration of the wastewater shall be made annually, or more often, as may be deemed necessary by the director. 
(2)  Sampling and analysis procedures. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR part 136, as amended. The samples shall be 24-hour composite samples. At a minimum, three 24-hour composite samples shall be made. Sample results shall be averaged using a flow weighted average to determine the overall average concentration for use in billing the industrial surcharge. Grab samples taken in accordance with 40 CFR part 136 shall be taken for total toxic organics, pH, oil and grease, hexavalent chromium, phenol, cyanide, etc. 
(f)  Permit fees. The city may establish a fee for industrial pretreatment permits. Such fee shall be as stated in section 12-111. This fee will be collected prior to the issuance or reissuance of an industrial pretreatment permit. These fees will be used to offset the costs of implementing the city's pretreatment program. Other permit and permit fees associated with (septic) waste haulers, grease trap maintenance companies, and port-a-john haulers will be assessed. These permits and permit fees will be issued by the director to each company doing business in the city's service area. In addition, a dollar amount per 1,000 gallons of (septic or port-a-john) waste discharged to the city's sewer system by waste haulers will also be assessed. This fee will be set by the city and will be used to offset the costs of treatment at the POTW. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-143) 
Sec. 111-144. - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to Public Law 92-500, shall be considered as a part of this article upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in 40 CFR 403. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-144) 
Sec. 111-145. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
In the event a wastewater discharge permit is made to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-145) 
Secs. 111-146—111-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1. 

Sec. 111-174. - Definitions. 
The following words, term and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Biomedical waste means pathological waste, biological waste cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals), sharps, chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated and other such wastes. See O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Commercial purpose means for the purpose of economic gain. 
Department of utilities means the city department responsible for water treatment, wastewater treatment, water distribution, wastewater collection, utility billing, stormwater, utility engineering, solid waste management, and sanitation. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Hazardous substance means any substance listed on the List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities, codified as 40 CFR 302, Table 302.4, or any substance listed on the List of Extremely Hazardous Substances and Their Threshold Planning Quantities, codified as 40 CFR 355, Appendix A. See O.C.G.A. § 12-8-92. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act and codified as 40 CFR 261.3 and any designated hazardous waste. See O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62. 
Household garbage means animal, vegetable, and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as by-products of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials. 
Landfill means an area of land on which or an excavation in which solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
Solid waste means any waste derived from commercial establishments, households, single-family residences, multifamily residences, hotels, motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and recreation areas. The term includes household garbage, trash, and similar refuse, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations, septic tank waste, or industrial processes or operations. 
User means a customer who utilizes city services. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-174) 
Sec. 111-175. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the proper disposal of solid waste. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-175) 
Sec. 111-176. - City responsible for sanitation services generally. 
(a)  All garbage, trash and refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the city through agents of the city or through its designated contractor(s), except as expressly provided in this chapter. No person shall collect and dispose of garbage, trash and refuse as a commercial enterprise in the city without express permission from the mayor and council. 
(1)  To facilitate this collection process, the city is empowered to enter into contractual agreements for the provision of residential and/or commercial solid waste disposal services, as well as for the disposal of recyclable materials. 
(2)  In the event the city enters into contractual relationships for solid waste and/or recyclable services, it may, in its discretion, contract with a single entity for the provision of said services, or may enter into agreements with multiple entities. 
(b)  No person shall operate a landfill, an inert waste landfill, or a construction/demolition waste landfill without permission from the mayor and council. All such landfills shall at a minimum comply with the rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, chapter 391-3-4, Solid Waste Management. 
(c)  All persons and/or entities seeking to enter into a contract with the city for the purpose of providing any service under this article shall grant access to the their solid waste collection facilities for the purpose of conducting all actions necessary to inspect such facilities to ensure compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal rules and regulations; and to ensure that such solid waste collection practices do not pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public. "Solid waste collection facilities" shall include solid waste and recycling receptacles, dumpsters, transfer stations and other machinery or equipment necessary in the solid waste collection process. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-176) 
Sec. 111-177. - Collection days assigned. 
The city or its designated contractor will collect solid waste in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the city and kept on file in the department of utilities and the office of the city clerk. All solid waste collection, including common household garbage and commercial trash and refuse, shall be performed in a timely and responsible manner to prevent the spread of disease; to prevent a public nuisance; to avoid any unnecessary danger to children or the general public, and to prevent any serious threat to the public health and safety. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-177) 
Sec. 111-178. - Preparation and storage of solid waste for collection. 
Solid waste shall be placed in plastic bags with the tops securely tied. Solid waste, garbage and refuse placed in containers that are not bagged in plastic bags with the tops securely tied will not be collected and customer will be notified of noncompliance with this section. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-178) 
Sec. 111-179. - Design and construction of dumpster storage areas. 
(a)  All dumpster storage areas shall be enclosed and provided with a reinforced concrete pad that is sloped to a drain which shall be plumbed to the sanitary sewer system. No dumpster pad shall be connected to the storm-sewer system. All dumpster storage areas shall be elevated and/or constructed in such a way as to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing into the storage area. 
(b)  All dumpster storage areas shall be covered with a roof to prevent stormwater from entering the sanitary sewer system via the dumpster pad drain. 
(c)  All dumpster storage structures shall have three solid sides and be constructed of city-approved masonry materials. These structures shall contain doors that cover the opening to the structure and that limit visibility and contain loose debris and litter. 
(d)  All dumpster storage areas shall be equipped with a hose bib an above-ground heated RPZ backflow prevention device. The hose bib and water hose storage area shall be located inside the dumpster storage structure and installed in such a way as to prevent damage to the hose bib. 
(e)  A properly designed reinforced concrete turnaround shall be provided for garbage truck turn around. 
(f)  Maintenance. Dumpster storage areas shall be properly maintained and cleaned. Maintenance includes but is not limited to doors, roof structure, drain, hose bib, concrete pad, and truck turnaround. All dumpster storage structures shall be cleaned regularly and shall be free of both solid and liquid wastes at all time. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-179) 
Sec. 111-180. - Unauthorized use of dumpsters and prohibiting scavenging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or otherwise leave trash in dumpsters that are leased and paid for private use, except by permission of the owner. This prohibition includes dumpsters on government property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove solid waste from dumpsters. Trash in these dumpsters is the property of the company providing the solid waste disposal service. 
(c)  Each dumpster shall display one sign in easy to read printing, which sign shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Notice that the unauthorized and unlawful use of the dumpster is a violation of this section. 
(2)  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. 
(d)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall on conviction thereof be punished as prescribed in section 111-185 of this Code. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-180) 
Sec. 111-181. - Placing of solid waste for pickup. 
(a)  Solid waste shall be placed so as to be easily accessible to street pickup, and shall not be placed over or next to fixed items such as fire hydrants, telephone or electrical boxes, mail boxes or anything that could be damaged by equipment or personnel picking up said items, but not including the street, sidewalk, or properties other than the premises of the depositor. The city will not be responsible for repairing or replacing items removed or damaged which was placed curbside in such a manner that it appeared to be intended for removal or was not visible because it was mixed with other items placed curbside. 
(b)  Solid waste cans or containers shall be placed and made ready for pickup starting no later than 12:01 a.m. on the designated day for pickup. Once solid waste is removed from the containers, they shall be removed from the street-side, said removal to occur no later than 11:59 p.m. on the day designated of pickup. 
(c)  The city will not collect the following materials or classes of materials: 
(1)  Discarded building materials, broken concrete, bricks, rock, or debris resulting from repairs, major cleanups (this includes but is not limited to cleaning out of basements, attics, storage areas, or major cleanups from move ins or move outs), remodeling, or construction waste (plumbing fixtures, including but not limited to sinks, bath tubs, shower stalls, toilets, cabinets, doors, windows, roofing debris, lumber, siding). Such material must be disposed of by the contractor, tenant, or owner of the property. 
(2)  Rubber tires, wheels, batteries, used oil, paint or paint cans, automotive parts, acid, explosive material, flammable liquids, inflammable liquids, dangerous or corrosive material of any kind, hazardous or bio-medical waste or any waste requiring special disposal procedures by the rules of solid waste management of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources chapter 391-3-4. 
(d)  Large appliances and items such as washers, dryers, microwaves, stoves, refrigerators, air conditioners, trash compactors, water heaters, televisions, computers, monitors, stereos, furniture, appliances, and carpet will be picked up on a special fee basis only. The aforementioned list is not intended to be exhaustive, and all solid waste customers are encouraged to speak with the director of utilities if there are any questions regarding the need for a special fee pickup. Placement of such items curbside without making prior arrangements for pickup with the city shall be deemed a violation of this Code section. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-181) 
Sec. 111-182. - Yard trimmings. 
(a)  Yard trimming disposal shall be restricted as follows: 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste, except at landfills restricted to construction or demolition waste; 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at municipal solid waste disposal facilities having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within its jurisdiction; 
(3)  Before collection, yard trimmings shall be separated and stored for collection in a separate container from all other municipal solid waste; 
(4)  To the maximum extent feasible, yard trimmings must be sorted and stockpiled, chipped, composed, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled or delivered to a facility which will make such beneficial use of the yard trimmings. 
(b)  Each resident of the city is required to dispose of yard trimmings in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to require a solid waste collector licensed by or contracted to the city to collect yard trimmings for disposal. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to require the city to provide for the collection of, or a location for, the disposal of yard trimmings. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prevent an occupier of land from mulching or composting yard trimmings for use on the premises. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-182) 
Sec. 111-183. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  Carcasses of cats, rats, chickens or other fowl shall be well buried by the occupant of any premises on which they may be. 
(b)  All other carcasses shall be reported to the director of utilities of the city, or his designee, and shall not be disposed of otherwise. Such person or the chief of police shall have all carcasses in the streets or in private lots removed out of the city limits and then buried or otherwise disposed of so as not to create a nuisance. All such dead carcasses shall be removed at the expense of the owners of the animal, if known, and the city shall collect the fee for the same as provided by law. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-183) 
Sec. 111-184. - Billing procedure. 
Monthly solid waste management charges shall be billed and collected in the same manner and at the same time as charges for water service are billed and collected. The fee for solid waste management and disposal, including any special fees related to said service, shall be derived from the cost to the city in providing this service, plus a service charge, said service charge to be set by the mayor and council in a schedule of fees maintained by the utilities department. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-184) 
Sec. 111-185. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violating article provisions. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  Termination of service. 
(1)  Any person charged with a violation of any section or provision of this chapter, including failure or refusal to pay solid waste utility charges for 60 days, shall be given a written notice and instructions from the office of the director of utilities or his designee as to the required remedy for such violation, including but not limited to reimbursement for solid waste disposal undertaken or ordered by the city. Failure to comply with the requirements of such written notice and instructions of the director of utilities or his designee may result in the termination of all utility services by the director of utilities or his designee, said termination to be in addition to any and all fines or imprisonment described above. 
(2)  Reinstatement of city solid waste collection and other utilities shall only be provided after the person or entity has fully complied with all the provisions of this article and any remediation required by the director of utilities. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-185) 
Secs. 111-186—111-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 111-209. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-209) 
Sec. 111-210. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall on conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-11. In addition to any fine, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city. In sound discretion of the court, additional penalties may be imposed, including: 
(1)  The person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(2)  The person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pickup and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(3)  The court may publish or direct the publication of the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-210) 
Sec. 111-211. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any public subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-211) 
Sec. 111-212. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-212) 
Sec. 111-213. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-213) 
Sec. 111-214. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-214) 
Sec. 111-215. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-215) 
Sec. 111-216. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-216) 
Sec. 111-217. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, article, ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-217) 
Sec. 111-218. - Prohibition against littering [on] public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the State or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-218) 
Sec. 111-219. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-219) 
Sec. 111-220. - Proper disposal. 
All discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at constructions sites that may cause adverse impacts to water quality must be properly disposed of in a sanitary landfill. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-220) 
Secs. 111-221—111-248. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 111-249. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the city separate storm-sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Agriculture means the raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, ratites, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals, or the production of agricultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural and nonstructural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
City separate storm-sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances which is located within city-owned right-of-way and designed and used only for collecting or conveying stormwater runoff or other approved surface water discharges. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Clean Water Act (CWA), section 401 means that provision of federal law that requires that an applicant for a federal license or permit provide a certification that any discharges from the facility will comply with the act including water quality standard requirements. 
Clean Water Act, section 404 means provisions which regulate the disposal of dredged and fill material into "water of the United States" including wetlands. Other activities which destroy wetlands such as drainage, flooding, pumping and burning are not regulated under the CWA unless they entail discharges of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, catch basins, curbs, gutters, storm drains, etc. 
County health department means the Forsyth County Health Department established by the Georgia Health Code (O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1) or the executive officer and his or her designated representative acting on the health department's behalf for the administration and enforcement of septic tank rules. 
Crossings means those crossings for roads, driveways, paths and utilities. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Discharge means the release of treated or untreated stormwater runoff or other material to the city separate storm-sewer. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage system means a conveyance or system of conveyances designed and used for collecting or conveying stormwater runoff. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Filling means the natural or manmade placement of any soil or solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Grading means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hazardous material means a flammable, highly corrosive, acidic or toxic material as identified in O.C.G.A. § 12-14-1 in the oil and hazardous materials spill reporting requirements. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city's separate storm-sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit connection means a connection to the city's separate storm-sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the city separate storm-sewer system). 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city's separate storm-sewer system, except as exempted by this article. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26 (b)(14). 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the longterm inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Intermittent stream means a stream which flows only at certain times of the year when it receives water from springs or from some sub-surface source such as a seep. This definition is not meant to include drainage ways that flow only during and shortly after storm events. 
Issuing authority means the City of Cumming, Georgia. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article or to prevent structural failure of such systems. 
Maximum extent practicable means best management practices, control techniques, system design or engineering methods and any other provisions which can be economically and reasonably implemented to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the city separate storm-sewer system. 
"Municipal separate storm-sewer system" means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Perennial stream means a stream which flows continuously in a well-defined channel throughout most of the year under normal climatic conditions. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pervious surface means any surface that allows stormwater to infiltrate the ground below, including, but not limited to, gravel, porous pavement (such as a lattice paver), mulch, grassed areas, and forested areas. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state, or federal government. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Riparian zones or riparian environments means the areas that border streams, rivers, lakes and wetlands. Riparian zones can be floodplains, streamside forests or stream banks. They are usually different from surrounding lands because they have unique soil and vegetation characteristics and are strongly influenced by water. Riparian zones provide an interface between the water and the land and they serve many functions which make them valuable to people. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Sediment means soils, both organic and inorganic, or other superficial materials transported and/or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stream bank means the uppermost part of the bank, usually marked by a break in slope, or as otherwise defined by rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). A stream bank is not necessarily the water's edge. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Top of bank means the mark on all lakes and streams that will be found by examining the beds and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland in respect to vegetation. 
Undisturbed buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Undisturbed upland area means any fully vegetated lands, greater than 200 feet from the banks of a water body, that are to remain ungraded after a project's completion. These areas include, but are not limited to, undisturbed forested areas, pasture land that is to remain undeveloped, and other natural areas. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of the water. 
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-249) 
Sec. 111-250. - Findings. 
(a)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition. Land disturbing activities associated with development can threaten the aquatic integrity and storage capacity of water resources. 
(b)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. The ability of natural systems to attenuate the negative effects of stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicants, nutrients and sedimentation into water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable. Studies have documented that the main causes of degradation of water quality are increased flows, sedimentation and erosion, and habitat destruction. The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(c)  It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. Adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and green-space areas. 
(d)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-250) 
Sec. 111-251. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This article is intended to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and the region by ensuring the quality of water resources. The city has established this set of stormwater management requirements to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to comply with the model ordinances of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District regarding post-development stormwater management. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-251) 
Sec. 111-252. - Objectives. 
This article seeks to meet its purposes through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with adopted open space and/or greenspace protection plans; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the longterm responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and longterm followup. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-252) 
Sec. 111-253. - Applicability. 
(a)  New development or redevelopment. This article shall apply to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading, land disturbance, or development applications, unless exempt pursuant to this article. The standards and requirements of this article apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the director of utilities or zoning administrator to be a hotspot land use; 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in this section, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules; 
(5)  Any development activity that results in the increase of peak rate of discharge by more than one cubic foot per second in the ten-year storm when compared to the site prior to its development. Sites undergoing numerous small additions will require a stormwater management facility when this threshold is met; 
(6)  Any development activity that results in the calculated discharge of 65 pounds per acre per year of suspended solids. The suspended solids discharge rate is to be calculated using the city stormwater quality performance review form, and no water quality monitoring is required to verify compliance with this suspended solids requirement. Sites undergoing numerous small additions will require a stormwater management facility when this threshold is met; 
(7)  Any development activity for which the stormwater management report indicates will result in adverse impacts to stormwater quality and/or quantity. 
(8)  Any development that discharges stormwater to a 303d listed body of water. 
(b)  Existing development. If the city deems that an existing development is having a deleterious impact on the storm-sewer system, a body of water such as but not limited to a stream or lake, a downstream property, or other impact, the city may require that the existing property owner bring the property into compliance with the requirements of this article which includes but is not limited to the design, construction, and maintenance of a stormwater management structure or other applicable BMP and/or Good housekeeping practice. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-253) 
Sec. 111-254. - Exemptions. 
The following activities may be exempt from this article, if deemed acceptable by the city: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director of utilities. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-254) 
Sec. 111-255. - Assignment of administrative authority. 
(a)  The director of utilities shall have authority to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this article in the post-development processes. Post-development processes include but are not limited to the maintenance and repair of stormwater detention facilities, BMPs, and other stormwater structures. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall have authority to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this article in the plan review, development permitting, inspection, and post-development processes, as more specifically described in this division. The zoning administrator shall be responsible generally for administering the plan submission requirements of this article and coordination of reviews concurrent with other city development requirements, including zoning, subdivision, and development and building permitting. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-255) 
Sec. 111-256. - Relationship to other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-256) 
Sec. 111-257. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards, in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. Said manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-257) 
Sec. 111-258. - Appeals. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals as established in article II of the city zoning ordinance is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director of utilities in the interpretation or enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days, by filing with the director of utilities notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the board of zoning appeals. 
(c)  The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give at least 15 days of public notice thereof and due notice to the parties in interest and shall render a decision on the appeal within 60 days of the date of the public hearing. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-258) 
Secs. 111-259—111-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 111-280. - Notice of violation and citation. 
(a)  Whenever the director of utilities determines that a violation of this article or regulations and procedures adopted thereto has occurred, he shall serve upon the stormwater discharger a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director of utilities, a citation shall be issued for the discharger to appear in the municipal court. The penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues will constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director of utilities may issue a citation to appear in municipal court without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the city engineer, the illicit discharge or illicit connection was not an accidental discharge or if the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and general welfare, or the city municipal separate storm-sewer system (MS4). 
(c)  If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the director of utilities shall issue a citation to the discharger to appear in the municipal court. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director of utilities to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-280) 
Sec. 111-281. - Response to notice of violation or summons and corrective plan. 
Within 15 days of receipt of the notice of violation, the discharger shall submit to the director of utilities a written explanation of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the illicit discharge, illicit connection or other activity made unlawful by this article and which resulted in the notice of violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation, including corrective and preventive procedures and implementation of best management practices, where necessary to prevent recurrence. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. The failure to submit this written explanation and plan as required by this section shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-281) 
Sec. 111-282. - Cease and desist order. 
When the director of utilities finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article or that person's past violations are likely to recur, the director of utilities may issue an order to the person directing the person to cease and desist all such violations and to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with the provisions of this article; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing and threatened violation and to prevent recurrence of the violation. 
Each day of violation of a cease and desist order, after notification thereof, shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-282) 
Sec. 111-283. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall on conviction thereof be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the director of utilities from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-283) 
Sec. 111-284. - Injunctive proceedings. 
(a)  The director of utilities may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of or to correct violations of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief which restrains the violation or compels compliance with the requirements imposed by this article on activities of the violator. The director of utilities may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the violator to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(b)  The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, environmental impact assessments, geotechnical work, and other costs of any actual damages incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, costs of containment and cleanup. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-284) 
Sec. 111-285. - Civil damages suits. 
When the director of utilities finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, the director of utilities may file a civil damage action against the violator through the city attorney, seeking such damages, fees, and costs as are permitted by law. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-285) 
Sec. 111-286. - Cooperation with other governments. 
The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purposes of this article, to comply with the provisions of the city's stormwater permit, and to implement the city's stormwater management program. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, agreements regarding enforcement provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative stormwater management programs, and cooperative stormwater monitoring, maintenance, enforcement, and management of municipal storm-sewer systems, or other actions as may be needed to control the contribution of pollutants from and between any municipal system and the city municipal separate storm-sewer system (MS4). 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-286) 
Sec. 111-287. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  If, after inspection, the condition of a stormwater conveyance or discharge presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right to take action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and make the stormwater conveyance safe. 
(b)  The director of utilities may conduct emergency maintenance and remediation operations on private property and on private stormwater conveyances. Emergency maintenance or remediation operations shall constitute actions to remedy conditions that in the opinion of the city engineer create a condition potentially injurious to life, property, or the city municipal separate storm-sewer system (MS4). 
(c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any stormwater conveyance shall not be construed as constituting a continuing obligation on the part of the city. 
(d)  All costs incurred from any emergency work performed by the city shall be the responsibility of the owner and such costs shall constitute a lien on the property, which shall be recorded in the records of the county. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-287) 
Sec. 111-288. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
In the event a stormwater discharge is made to a storm-sewer conveyance system under the jurisdiction of an approved stormwater management ordinance for another governing authority, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-288) 
Secs. 111-289—111-309. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 111-310. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this division prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this division, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit the following to the city zoning administrator: 
(1)  Permit application on a form provided by the zoning administrator for that purpose. 
(2)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with this division; 
(3)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with this division; 
(4)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with this division, if applicable; 
(5)  Performance bond in accordance with this division, if applicable; and 
(6)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with this division. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-310) 
Sec. 111-311. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the landowner or developer meet with the zoning administrator and utilities director for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal, the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: 
a.  Existing and proposed topography; 
b.  Perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); 
d.  Boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and 
e.  Location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans and green-space or open space plans (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-311) 
Sec. 111-312. - Stormwater management report. 
(a)  A stormwater management report shall be submitted during the development review process for every project to which this division applies. A professional engineer currently registered in the state must prepare the report. The purpose of this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff, so that stormwater runoff hazards are not created, existing runoff-related problems are not expounded, and that stormwater quality is not adversely affected, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed. 
(b)  The stormwater management report shall identify the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre-developed and post-developed conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties may require anticipating future development in addition to addressing existing conditions. It shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at a satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and scope to define the boundaries of the site relative to any applicable water courses, drainage divides, drainage structures and other pertinent features. 
(c)  The stormwater management report shall estimate the stormwater quality in terms of total suspended solids for both pre-developed and post-developed conditions. 
(d)  The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage way "immediately" downstream from the project. In determining downstream effects from stormwater discharge control structures and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies, using the two-, ten-, and 25-year design storm, shall extend to the next downstream structure or shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed. If the discharge calculations indicate that adjacent properties, between the exit of the proposed development and the "ten percent downstream point" might be adversely impacted by the proposed development, then the engineer shall provide a summary of his recommendations. 
(e)  The site plan that is submitted in conjunction with the stormwater management report shall depict all streams, lakes, wetlands, and other bodies of water. Additionally, the plan shall depict relevant the boundaries of the 100-year floodplain. The floodplain boundary information must be obtained using Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) guidelines. One hundred-year base flood elevations (BFEs) for areas that are designated as approximate zone A on the city's FEMA maps must be calculated using appropriate FEMA methodologies. Scaling off the FEMA maps to derive flood boundary information is unacceptable and shall not be permitted. 
(f)  The following criteria shall be evaluated by the engineer preparing the stormwater management report: 
(1)  Existing land uses downstream. 
(2)  Anticipated future land uses downstream. 
(3)  Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development. 
(4)  Presence of existing stormwater quality and/or quantity problems. 
(5)  Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage systems. 
(6)  Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously. 
(7)  Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the project site. 
(8)  The nature of the receiving watercourse. 
All designs, calculations, and rationale must follow the principles set forth in the city stormwater manual. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-312) 
Sec. 111-313. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this division, including the performance criteria set forth in this division. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this division are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual, including the following: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in this division; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in this division must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in subsection (c)(4) of this section; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local green-space protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the city's erosion and sedimentation control ordinance (chapter 107 of this Code) and any applicable NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and green-space areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in this division, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with this division. 
(11)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm-sewer system. 
(12)  Application review fees. The applicant shall pay a fee for review of any stormwater management application, which shall be based on the fee structure established by the mayor and council. Said fee shall be made at the time of application for permit approval under the terms of this division. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-313) 
Sec. 111-314. - Required easements. 
(a)  Access easements. Owners of stormwater conveyances that discharge to the city municipal separate storm-sewer system shall provide a perpetual easement to the city that provides for adequate access from a public road to the stormwater conveyance for the purpose of the monitoring, inspection and emergency maintenance of the conveyances. No obstruction shall be built, constructed or planted that would interfere with the property interests granted to the city by such easement. 
(b)  Drainage easements. The developer shall execute a 20-foot drainage easement surrounding the entire perimeter of the facility in favor of the city for the purpose of inspecting and monitoring the facility if necessary. The easement boundary shall be measured from the 100-year stormwater ponding limits or six inches above the elevation of the overflow. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-314) 
Sec. 111-315. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice under the terms of this division and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. Inspection and maintenance agreements shall meet the requirements specified in this division. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-315) 
Sec. 111-316. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city zoning administrator. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in this division (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)  After review by the utilities director, the zoning administrator shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same as a revision to the initial application. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this division, the zoning administrator will issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-316) 
Sec. 111-317. - General requirements following approval of permit. 
Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this division and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city's administrative officials shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city in accordance with the procedures established in this division; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by this division. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-317) 
Sec. 111-318. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for longterm operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director of utilities that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-318) 
Sec. 111-319. - Stormwater management facility design criteria. 
(a)  All designs, calculations, and rationale must follow the principles set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(b)  Stormwater runoff must be managed to control the velocity at the point of discharge so as to minimize accelerated erosion of the site and increased sedimentation of the streams. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures and devices shall be so planned, designed and constructed as to provide for a range of design flows for flood control. These design flows should be demonstrated for the two-, ten-, and 25-year storm events using the procedures as outlined in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's "Technical Release 55 Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" or other acceptable calculation procedures. All BMPs must be designed for a 25-year storm. All stormwater management facilities must have outlet devices able to effectively route the 100-year storm. All disturbed land must drain to an approved BMP, and stormwater runoff must be managed for the entire drainage area above the detention system or BMP. 
(c)  Stormwater management facilities can only be located in perennial streams with strict adherence to United States Army Corps of Engineers permitting requirements. Such in-stream facilities do not include those for controlling erosion at land disturbing activities. Proper documentation demonstrating compliance with corps requirements must be provided before the city will permit the in-stream stormwater management facility. Additionally, a dredging plan depicting how the facility will be cleaned of silt accumulations in the future must be provided prior to permitting. 
(d)  During construction, all land disturbing activities (to include all land uses) must comply with sedimentation and erosion control procedures/program as defined by General Permit (No. GAR100000), and per the soil and sediment control ordinance (chapter 107 of this Code). 
(e)  Applicants must demonstrate compliance with the stormwater management plan to the city prior to approval of any building or subdivision permit request. 
(f)  After construction, runoff from the first 1.0 inches of rainfall must be captured and released evenly over a 48-hour period. Facilities must maintain peak flows for the two-, ten-, and 25-year storm at the property boundaries equal to or less than flow under undeveloped conditions and be able to route a 100-year storm through the facility. The site must discharge no more than a calculated 65 pounds of suspended solids per acre per year. The suspended solids discharge rate is to be calculated using the city stormwater quality performance review form, and no water quality monitoring is required to verify compliance with this suspended solids requirement. Alternative best management practices and alternative modeling methods are allowed and encouraged provided the same theoretical level of stormwater quality and quantity is achieved. The city will verify that best management practices deemed necessary by the city stormwater quality performance review form, or the approved alternative modeling method, are installed on site. The property owner may choose to designate additional undisturbed buffer areas to reach the targeted suspended solids discharge rate. The proper installation and maintenance of BMPs, undisturbed upland areas, and stream buffers deemed necessary by the city stormwater quality performance review form, or alternative modeling method, shall constitute a complete defense to any allegation of noncompliance with this subsection regardless of the result of water quality monitoring. The city stormwater quality performance review form uses the following BMP efficiencies and loading rates to calculate the discharge of suspended solids: 
(1)  BMP efficiencies. 

 
(2)  Total suspended solids (TSS) loading rates applied to land use categories. 

 
(g)  Stormwater management facility fencing. Fences and warning signs will be required on all detention ponds, constructed wetlands, retention ponds or similar devices where the sides of the device adjacent to the water are steeper than 3:1 and the depth of the water in the pond is greater than three feet. Fences shall be five feet high chain link or other approved material with a 12-foot-wide gate. The gate shall be locked with a Master Number 1 lock that is keyed as per the city, and two keys will be provided to the city. Fences shall be located on the outside edge of the 20-foot perimeter easement when possible. 
(h)  A silt gauge will be installed on all detention ponds consisting of a durable, weather-resistant post. The post will be embedded a minimum of two feet and extend a minimum of five feet above the ground. Numbers and adjacent tick marks must be on the post beginning with the number "1" at one foot above the ground elevation and thereafter a number and tick mark for each corresponding foot. Numbers and tick marks must be clear, readable, weather-resistant, and durable. 
(i)  A concrete survey marker shall be placed in the near vicinity of the stormwater management facility. The marker shall be a minimum of five inches by five inches in width and be embedded one foot into the ground. The marker shall have a "PK" nail embedded in the top. The marker must be placed above the high water elevation of the facility and within the drainage easement area. Alternate survey markers are allowed with prior approval from the city. 
(j)  Outlet structures and piping for residential stormwater management facilities must be constructed of concrete to be eligible for acceptance into the city maintenance system. 
(k)  All stormwater inlets installed by the developer shall have a storm-sewer stencil or insignia approved by the planning and zoning director. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-319) 
Secs. 111-320—111-341. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 111-342. - Establishment of a stormwater utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater management utility within the city which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the city's corporate limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. 
(b)  The city shall establish a stormwater enterprise fund in the city's budget and accounting system, separate and apart from its general fund, for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees, and licenses as may be established by the mayor and council. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be deposited promptly upon receipt into the stormwater enterprise fund, to be held and invested in trust for the purposes dedicated, and expended exclusively for all purposes of the utility allowable under state law, including capital project construction. No other funds of the city shall be deposited in the stormwater enterprise fund or commingled with dedicated stormwater revenues, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater enterprise fund, including grants, loans, and bond proceeds may be combined with and applied to stormwater management capital projects as deemed appropriate by the mayor and council, upon recommendation of the stormwater utility director. 
(c)  The mayor and council hereby transfers to the director operational control over the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment. Nothing contained herein nor in any other section of this division shall be construed as an acceptance, express or implied, of any stormwater management system, facility, or appurtenance, which has not heretofore been expressly accepted by the city. 
(d)  The city stormwater management utility is hereby authorized to charge a fee for the provision of stormwater management services, including but not limited to stormwater collection, distribution, and treatment of stormwater, within the city's corporate limits. Said fee shall be as described in the fee schedule as published and amended from time to time by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-342) 
Secs. 111-343—111-372. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DEDICATIONS, SECURITIES, AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 111-373. - Dedication and public acceptance of stormwater management facility. 
(a)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(b)  If the facilities are not publicly dedicated and accepted by the city, then the property owner on which the stormwater management facilities are located shall be responsible for proper inspection, maintenance, repair, and corrective action as my be required by the city. If a property owner or homeowners' association will be responsible for stormwater management facilities, then the planning and zoning director shall require that a note be placed on the final plat specifying these requirements and responsibilities. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-373) 
Sec. 111-374. - Acceptance of stormwater conveyances. 
As a condition to accepting the dedication of any stormwater conveyance or facility, maintenance bonds shall be issued to the city with good and sufficient surety or sureties in an amount determined as appropriate by the director of utilities to cover the maintenance of such stormwater conveyance or facility for a period of at least 12 months from the date of acceptance. In lieu of a maintenance bond, at its sole discretion, the city may accept an acceptable substitute, such as an irrevocable letter of credit, from a bank or savings and loan association. All bonds or bond substitutes must be issued and submitted in proper form. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-374) 
Sec. 111-375. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the department of planning and zoning and/or the department of utilities, as appropriate, or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-375) 
Sec. 111-376. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the director of utilities is required before the release of any bonds (performance securities) can occur. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-376) 
Sec. 111-377. - Inspection and acceptance of residential systems. 
Stormwater management facilities that have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans will be inspected at the time of final platting, and a punch list will be provided at that time. Prior to final plat approval, the following items must be completed: 
(1)  All punch list items must be properly addressed. 
(2)  After construction and before approval of the final plat, the designer shall submit a certified field run topographic map of the detention area and a revised hydrology study using the as-built topographic map. The topographic map of the stormwater management facility should include the state plane coordinates and mean sea level elevations of applicable outfalls, silt gauges, and survey markers. The as-built will be submitted in electronic form and hard copy form to the city planning and zoning department. 
(3)  The designer shall certify that the facility is working as it was designed and that the required detention storage and outflow rates are being provided. 
(4)  The stormwater management facility will be bonded. 
(5)  All accumulations of silt need to be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the stormwater management facility is at the design grade. The silt gauge should read zero upon completion. 
(6)  Subsequently, the facilities will be inspected prior to release of bonds. At that time, any deficiencies in the facility will be noted in the 45-day letter. The following items must be completed: 
a.  All deficiencies noted on the 45-day letter must be properly addressed. 
b.  All accumulations of silt need to be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the pond is at the design grade. The silt gauge should read zero upon completion. 
c.  The entire stormwater management facility needs to be stabilized with permanent vegetation as shown on the approved plans. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-377) 
Sec. 111-378. - Inspection and acceptance of nonresidential systems. 
A final inspection of nonresidential stormwater management systems will occur at the time the developer requests a certificate of occupancy inspection. At that time, any deficiencies in the facility will be noted as a punch-list item. The nonresidential development will not receive a certificate of occupancy until the following items are completed: 
(1)  After construction and before acceptance for occupation or otherwise, the designer shall submit a certified field run topographic map of the detention area and a revised hydrology study using the as-built topographic map. The topographic map of the stormwater management facility should include the state plane coordinates and mean sea level elevations of applicable outfalls, silt gauges, and survey markers. The as-built will be submitted in electronic form and hard copy form. 
(2)  The designer shall certify that the facility is working as it was designed and that the required detention storage and outflow rates are being provided. 
(3)  All accumulations of silt need to be removed so that the grade of the bottom of the stormwater management facility is at the design grade. The silt gauge should read zero upon completion. 
(4)  The entire stormwater management facility needs to be stabilized with permanent vegetation as shown on the approved plans. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-378) 
Secs. 111-379—111-399. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

Sec. 111-400. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the (local permitting authority) are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-400) 
Sec. 111-401. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the director of utilities for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream stream bank or channel integrity; and 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-401) 
Sec. 111-402. - Overbank flooding protection. 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under this division is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-402) 
Sec. 111-403. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-403) 
Sec. 111-404. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the director of utilities may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(b)  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-406) 
Sec. 111-405. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-405) 
Sec. 111-406. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-406) 
Sections 111-407—111-425. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MAINTENANCE, INSPECTION, INVESTIGATION, AND RIGHT OF ENTRY 

Sec. 111-426. - Stormwater conveyance ownership; authority of director of utilities. 
(a)  All stormwater conveyances shall be privately owned and maintained, unless duly accepted by the city for public ownership and maintenance. 
(b)  The director of utilities shall have the authority to investigate any apparent violation of any provision of this division and to take any action authorized by this division which is deemed appropriate to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(c)  The director of utilities may inspect any stormwater conveyance within or outside of an existing drainage easement to ensure that the facility is properly functioning and in good repair. 
(d)  The owner shall at his or her expense inspect, repair, and maintain all stormwater facilities and keep such facilities in good working order at all times. This includes but is not limited to the clearing of all trees and vegetation from all stormwater structures as required by the city. All underground detention and water quality structures shall be video-inspected at least once annually and a copy of the video provided to the city for review. All stormwater facilities and structures shall be properly maintained in a manner and at a frequency determined by the city and at no cost to the city. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-426) 
Sec. 111-427. - Specifications for inspection and maintenance agreements. 
All inspection and maintenance agreements required by this division shall at minimum consist of or contain the following: 
(1)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(2)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(3)  The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in this division. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-427) 
Sec. 111-428. - Longterm maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this division. 
(b)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the director of utilities shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may correct the violation as provided in this division. 
(c)  Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Routine inspections; 
(2)  Random inspections; 
(3)  Inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and 
(4)  Joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 
Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-428) 
Sec. 111-429. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the director of utilities. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-429) 
Sec. 111-430. - Failure to maintain; repairs. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days written notice (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to repair deficiencies in a timely manner. Failure on the part of the owner to repair deficient stormwater detention facilities shall be a violation and will be punishable according to this division. If the owner of a facility does not make repairs in a time allowed by the city, and the condition of the facility poses a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare and warrants immediate action, the city may determine that it is necessary to make an emergency repair as allowed in this division. In such case of emergency repairs, the city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the utility bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such utility fees. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-430) 
Secs. 111-431—111-458. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 111-459. - Unlawful discharges and connections—Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the municipal separate storm-sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(2)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the municipal separate storm-sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments; 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters; 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the municipal separate storm-sewer system; and 
(6)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the municipal/county separate storm-sewer system. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-459) 
Sec. 111-460. - Purpose. 
(a)  This division is adopted to prohibit non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm-sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm-sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm-sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm-sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-460) 
Sec. 111-461. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the (municipal/county) separate storm-sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the (municipal/county) separate storm-sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the (municipal/county) separate storm-sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-461) 
Sec. 111-462. - Prohibitions of illicit discharges. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm-sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  Pursuant to General Permit (No. GAR100000), it shall be unlawful to discharge stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained. It shall be unlawful to allow discharge of stormwater runoff that results in the turbidity of receiving water(s) being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries. 
(c)  Upon notice from the director of utilities, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this division or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent, or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may resume. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. Until the stop order has been rescinded, only work that is necessary to achieve compliance is allowed. No inspection shall be conducted on the property by the building inspection department while a stop work order is in effect. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-462) 
Sec. 111-463. - Exemptions. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition of this division: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and other water source not containing pollutants as approved by the city. 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm-sewer system. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-463) 
Sec. 111-464. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm-sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm-sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this division if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm-sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this division must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city director of utilities. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm-sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm-sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm-sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-464) 
Sec. 111-465. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city director of utilities prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm-sewer system. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-465) 
Sec. 111-466. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city's administrative and enforcement officials shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city's enforcement official. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city's enforcement official ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city's enforcement official shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city's enforcement official to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city's enforcement official may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city's enforcement official. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the (local enforcement authority) and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city's enforcement official access to a facility is a violation of this division. 
(7)  If the city's enforcement official has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city's enforcement official is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this division or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city's enforcement official may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-466) 
Sec. 111-467. - Reporting, remediation and corrective action requirements. 
(a)  In the event of an illicit discharge or illicit connection to the city municipal separate storm-sewer system, the discharger shall immediately inform the director of utilities of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge or connection. The initial report shall be followed up by a written report to the director of utilities, describing the exact location, nature and events of the illicit discharge or illicit connection, as well as describing details on corrective procedures which have been taken or scheduled to prevent recurrence of the illicit discharge or illicit connection. This written report shall be submitted within 15 days from the initial report. The failure to report an illicit discharge or illicit connection as required by this Code section shall constitute a separate violation of this division. 
(b)  The discharger shall take immediate action to remediate, correct, contain, treat, and minimize the effects of the illicit discharge or illicit connection on the city municipal separate storm-sewer system and receiving streams and to ensure no recurrence of the illicit discharge or illicit connection, including corrective and preventive procedures, and implementation of best management practices, where necessary to prevent recurrence. The failure to remediate the effects of an illicit discharge or illicit connection as required by this Code section shall constitute a separate violation of this division. 
(c)  The requirement to report and remediate with respect to an illicit discharge or illicit connection shall be supplemental to any other violation, penalty, remedy or other action taken with respect to the illicit discharge or illicit connection. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-467) 
Sec. 111-468. - Cooperation with other governments. 
The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purposes of this division, to comply with the provisions of the city's stormwater permit, and to implement the city stormwater management program. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, agreements regarding enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative stormwater management programs and cooperative monitoring, maintenance, enforcement and management of municipal separate storm-sewer systems, or other actions as may be needed to control the contribution of pollutants from and between any municipal system and the city municipal separate storm-sewer system. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-468) 
Sec. 111-469. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  If, after inspection, the condition of a stormwater conveyance or discharge presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right to take action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and make the stormwater conveyance safe. 
(b)  The director of utilities may conduct emergency maintenance or remediation operations on private property and on private stormwater conveyances. Emergency maintenance or remediation operations shall constitute actions to remedy conditions that in the opinion of the city engineer create a condition potentially injurious to life, property or the city municipal separate storm-sewer system. 
(c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any stormwater conveyance shall not be construed as constituting a continuing obligation on the part of the city. 
(d)  All costs incurred from any emergency work performed by the city shall be the responsibility of the owner and such costs shall constitute a lien on the property, which shall be recorded in the records of Forsyth County. 
( Ord. of 2-18-2014 , § 111-469) 
Chapter 113 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 113-1. - Short title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cumming, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, art. II) 
Sec. 113-2. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following terms, words, and phrases shall have the meaning given in this article. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, terms used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Terms used in the present tense include the future. 
Abutting means having property lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
Accessory apartment, attached, means a second dwelling unit that is added to the structure of an existing site-built single-family dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single household, with provision within the attached accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling is considered an accessory use to the principal dwelling. 
Accessory apartment, detached, means a second dwelling unit that is added to an existing accessory structure (e.g., residential space above a detached garage), or as a new freestanding accessory building, for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single household, with provision within the attached accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling is considered an accessory use to the principal dwelling. 

Accessory Apartment, Detached (Above Garage Shown)
Active recreation means equipment and areas prepared for active use for recreational and leisure purposes, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Playground equipment (swing sets and climbing structures); 
(2)  Courts for basketball, volleyball, and tennis; leveled, striped fields for football, soccer, or multiple purposes; community picnic pavilions (including covered facilities with grills and/or fire rings); 
(3)  Community buildings for recreational events and golf courses, including clubhouses, developed areas and accessory uses. 
Trails and bikeways through open spaces shall not be considered active recreational facilities. 
Adaptive reuse means rehabilitation or renovation and occupancy of an existing building or structures for use other than the present use. 
Agriculture means the cultivation or growth of a field or horticultural crop, including dairying, livestock and poultry raising, farm forestry, and other similar enterprises or uses. 
Airport means any area of land, water or mechanical structure which is used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, including any appurtenant structures and areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings, other airport facilities, rights-of-way or easements. 
Alley means a public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 

Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, and girders, except such emergency change as may be required for safety purposes; any addition to a building; any change in use; or any movement of a building from one location to another. 
Appeal means a request for a review an administrative official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or an action taken by an administrative official in the application or enforcement of this chapter. 
Assisted living facility means residences for the frail elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of self-administered medication. They may provide other services incidental to the above. For purposes of this chapter, assisted living facilities are considered institutionalized residential living and care facilities. 
Automated teller machine means a mechanized consumer device that is operated by a customer and which performs banking and financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial institution. An automated teller machine is an accessory use. 
Automobile sales and service establishment means new and used car, truck, tractor, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle, and other motorized vehicle sales, leasing, rental, and service, including mobile and manufactured home and modular building sales, and agricultural implement and equipment. This definition includes automotive services such as rental car facilities, top and body, paint, automotive glass, transmission, and tire repair shops, carwashes, including automated and staffed facilities, and oil change and lubrication facilities. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its lowest floor subgrade (below ground level) on at least one side. 

Bed and breakfast inn means a facility where overnight accommodations are provided to travelers for compensation, with or without a morning meal, and where the operators of the facility live on the premises. 
Berm means an earthen mound or embankment, usually two to six feet in height, designed to provide visual interest, screen views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a wide range of stormwater management regulations, procedures, engineering designs, activities, prohibitions or practices which have been demonstrated to effectively control nonpoint source pollution encompassing the quality, quantity, and erosion and sediment control aspects of stormwater. Such practices could include but not be limited to: detention and retention ponds, sand filters, vegetative swales and buffers, installation of stream bank stabilization measures, and public education programs. 
Board of zoning appeals means the body established by these regulations composed of or appointed by the mayor and council which has original jurisdiction to take action on appeals and variances as herein established. 
Buffer means a general term referring to the retention of natural vegetation, and the enhancement where provided, of the natural vegetation, within a specifically defined area and for a specified purpose. The term "buffer" is further defined by type and purpose, as follows: 
(1)  Stream buffer means an area required to be set aside by this zoning chapter for protection of riparian corridors. 
(2)  Zoning buffer means a landscaped open space and/or screen of a width specified by section 113-182 for nonresidential zoning districts when abutting residential zoning districts, located between incompatible zoning districts and land uses, for the purpose of visibly separating zoning districts and land uses through distance, and to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances. A zoning buffer is that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, or access and service areas, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the common property line. A zoning buffer consists of trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated and replanted if allowed to be disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. For purposes of this chapter, the natural buffer required abutting the State Highway 400 right-of-way as specified in section 113-182 shall be considered a zoning buffer. 
Buildable area means the portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip/area or buffer; that portion of a lot wherein a building or structure may be located. 

Buildable Area
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind, including tents, awnings, or vehicles used for purposes of a building. 
Building coverage means the horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal buildings, accessory buildings, and accessory structures on the lot, not including steps, terraces, and uncovered porches. 
Building, accessory, means a building subordinate to the main building on a lot and used for purposes incidental to the main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 

Building, Accessory and Principal
Building, height of, means the vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the deck lines of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. The term "grade" is defined as the average elevation of the ground on all sides of a building. 
Building official means the chief building inspector of the City of Cumming, or authorized representative. 
Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the plot on which same is situated. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the lot on which said structure is located. 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of a building or any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements shall be observed for those areas adjacent to street rights-of-way. For purposes of this chapter, a required yard is equivalent to a required building setback line. 
Carwash means the use of a site for washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles, other vehicles, or other light duty equipment. Carwashes consist of self-service, staffed, or mechanically automated facilities. 
Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the mayor and council and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs, ditches or pavement ends of such street. 
Certificate of occupancy means a legal statement or document issued by the building official indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
Church means a building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures that by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services. Associated accessory uses include, but are not limited to, when owned and operated by the church: schools, meeting halls, indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, day care, counseling, homeless shelters, and kitchens. 
Circus means the temporary use of land offering entertainment and instruction in the form of such things as thrill rides, games of chance and skill, educational exhibits, display of oddities and the like. The term "circus" also includes carnivals and fairs. 
City engineer means the engineer of the City of Cumming, or authorized representative. 
Clinic means a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
Club or lodge , nonprofit, means a building or premises, used for associations or organizations of an educational, fraternal, or social character, not operated or maintained for profit. Representative organizations include Elks, Veterans of Foreign Wars, and Lions. The term shall not include casinos, nightclubs, bottle clubs, or other establishments operated or maintained for profit. 
Coffee kiosk means a retail food business in a freestanding building that sells coffee or other beverages and incidental food sales from a drive-through window to customers within their vehicles for consumption off the premises and that provides no indoor or outdoor seating. A coffee kiosk is a drive-through facility. 
College or university means an educational use that provides training beyond and in addition to that training received in the 12th grade (i.e., undergraduate and graduate), and which has students regularly attending classes, and which confers associate, bachelor, master, or doctoral degrees. 
Commercial recreational facility, indoor, means a use that takes place within an enclosed building that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including but not limited to the following: assembly halls, auditoriums, meeting halls, art galleries and museums, billiard halls and pool rooms, amusement halls, video arcades, ice and roller skating rinks, fully-enclosed theaters, physical fitness centers and health clubs. 
Commercial recreational facility, outdoor, means a use of land and/or buildings that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including but not limited to the following: stadiums, amphitheaters, circuses and carnivals, fairgrounds, drive-in theaters, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, batting cages, racetracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, unenclosed firearms shooting ranges and turkey shoots, trout ponds, equestrian centers and horse and pony riding rinks, botanical and zoological gardens, ultralight flight parks, and bungee jumping. A golf course and private club that is built as part of a single-family residential subdivision and that operates in a quasi-public manner is not considered to be an outdoor commercial recreational facility. A recreational vehicle park, as defined in this chapter, is not considered to be an outdoor commercial recreational facility. 
Community recreation means a private recreational facility for use solely by the residents and guests of a particular residential development, including indoor facilities such as community meeting rooms and outdoor facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and playgrounds. These facilities are usually proposed, planned, and provided in association with a development and are usually located within the boundaries of such development. 
Compatibility means the characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include: intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled, and such environmental affects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, air pollution or radiation. 
Comprehensive plan means those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the mayor and council for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Conditional use means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the particular zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within a zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, may be found to be compatible and approved by the mayor and council within a particular zoning district as provided in certain instances by this chapter. 
Conditional zoning means the granting or adoption of zoning for property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, density or actions stipulated by the mayor and council to mitigate adverse impacts that are anticipated without imposition of such conditions. 
Condominium (residential building) means a building containing three or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned, common areas as defined by laws of the State of Georgia. 
Conservation design for subdivisions means a Practical Guide to Creating Open Space Networks, Washington, DC, Island Press, page 72. 
(1)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
(2)  The 100-year floodplain; 
(3)  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet in width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
(4)  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(5)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
(6)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
Conservation easement means a nonpossessory interest of a holder in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include: 
(1)  Retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open space values of real property; 
(2)  Ensuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open space use; 
(3)  Protecting natural resources; 
(4)  Maintaining or enhancing air or water quality; or 
(5)  Preserving the historical, architectural, archeological, or cultural aspects of real property (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1). 
A legally enforceable agreement between a property owner and the holder of the easement, in a form acceptable to the mayor and council and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Forsyth County. A conservation easement restricts the existing and future use of the defined tract or lot to conservation use, agriculture, passive recreation, or other specifically permitted use and prohibits further subdivision or development. 
_____
Conservation subdivision means a subdivision for detached, single-family, fee simple residences where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design and that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision. A conservation subdivision is not a use per se, but rather, a land planning technique that allows the clustering of uses in order to protect open spaces. 

Source: Arendt, Randall G. 1996, Conservation Design for Subdivisions: A Practical Guide to Creating Open Space Networks, Washington, DC, Island Press, page 128. 
_____
Construction field office means a manufactured home, travel trailer, truck trailer, and/or other structure used as an office in conjunction with a construction project. A construction field office is a temporary use. 
Contractor's establishment means an establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities including but not limited to plumbing, electrical work, building, paving, carpentry and other such contracting activities, including the storage of materials and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. 
Conversion means any change in the original use or purpose of a building or lot to a different use. 
Curbcut means a provision for vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Day care center means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group, and licensed or registered by the State of Georgia as a group day care home or day care center, wherein pay is received for group supervision and care, for fewer than 24 hours per day, seven or more children under 18 years of age. 
Deceleration lane means an added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the city engineer, that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Density means the number of dwelling units developed, or to be developed, per gross acre of land, or the gross square footage of a building per acre of land. For purposes of calculating the maximum density requirements of this chapter, the following shall not be included: 
(1)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
(2)  The 100-year floodplain; 
(3)  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
(4)  Wetlands that meet the definition of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
(5)  Road rights-of-way and overhead utility easements. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. 
Developmentally disabled person means a person with a disability resulting in substantial functional limitations in such person's major life activities which disability is attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, or autism or is attributable to any other condition related to mental retardation because such condition results in impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior similar to that of mentally retarded persons. 
District, zoning, means a geographical area or areas, designated with the use of symbols on the official zoning map, wherein uses of land are restricted in type, size, height and other limitations as established in these regulations. 
Drive-through means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided or goods are sold to the customer within a motor vehicle and outside of a principal building. 
Driving range means an area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and tees for practicing golf drives and putting, and which may include a snack bar and pro shop. A driving range is an outdoor commercial recreation facility. 
Dumpster means a container designed to hold refuse that has a hooking connection that permits it to be raised and dumped into a sanitation truck for disposal. 
Dwelling means a building, other than a manufactured home, mobile home, or house trailer, designed, arranged or used for permanent living, and/or sleeping quarters. 
(1)  Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
(2)  Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. 

(3)  Dwelling, single-family detached, fee-simple, means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by one family only and where each dwelling is located on its own lot in fee-simple title. 

Dwelling, Single-Family Detached
_____ 
(4)  Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 

On One Lot
Easement means a nonpossessory interest in land; a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons, of a portion of land for a specified purpose or purposes. 
Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than six unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit and using the same cooking facilities; provided, however, that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. Any group which is licensed by the State of Georgia, or any political subdivision thereof, which contains up to six developmentally disabled persons and up to two supervisors or surrogate parents residing on the premises at one time shall constitute a family. 
Family day care home means a private residence in which a business is operated by any person who receives therein (for pay) for supervision and care for fewer than 24 hours per day, three to not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not residents in the same private residence. For purposes of this chapter, a family day care home may be operated as a home occupation, subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
Farm means an area of land principally devoted to agriculture. 
Fee simple means the owner is entitled to the entire property with unconditional power of disposition during his life and which descends to his heirs and legal representatives upon his death intestate. 
Fence means an enclosure or barrier, composed of wood, masonry, stone, wire, iron, or other materials or combination of materials used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening, or confinement, including brick or concrete walls but not including hedges, shrubs, trees, or other natural growth. 
Fence, solid, means a fence, including entrance and exit gates, where access openings appear, through which no visual images can be seen. 
Finance, insurance, and real estate establishment. Such uses include, but are not limited to, banks, savings and loan institutions and credit unions, security and commodity exchanges, insurance agents, brokers, and service, real estate brokers, agents, managers, and developers, trusts, and holding and investment companies. 
Flea market means the use of land, structures or buildings for the sale of produce or goods, usually second or cut-rate. A flea market is considered an open air business. 
Floodplain, administrative, means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement (i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood-frame construction). The term "floor" does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Floor area means the sum of all square footages (areas) of each floor of a building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The following areas are excluded from the measurement of floor area: unfinished attics, attached garages or spaces used for off-street parking and loading, breezeways, and enclosed or unenclosed decks and porches. 
Floor area ratio means the floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the area of the lot. 

Floor Area Ratio
Funeral home means a building used for human funeral services. Such building contains a chapel and may include space and facilities for embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures, the indoor storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies, and the indoor storage of funeral vehicles. 
Garage means an accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles and other personal property as an accessory use. 
Glare means a sensation of brightness within the visual field that causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Golf course means a tract of land laid out with at least nine holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse and shelters as accessory uses. A golf course is not considered an outdoor commercial recreation facility. 
Grade means the average of the finished ground levels at the center of all walls of a building. 
Greenhouse means a building designed or used for growing or propagating plants, with walls or roof usually designed to transmit light. The term "greenhouse" shall not be construed to include commercial horticultural activities. 
Guesthouse means a lodging unit for temporary guests in an accessory building. No such lodging unit shall contain independent cooking or kitchen facilities and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Health spa means an establishment for profit or gain that provides services or facilities which are purported to assist patrons improve their physical condition or appearance through change in weight, treatment, dieting, or exercise. The term "health spa" includes an establishment designated as reducing salons, exercise gyms, health studios, health clubs, and other terms of similar import. Not included within the definition of the term "health spa" are facilities engaged in massage activity other than by a certified massage therapist (i.e., a graduate of an accredited massage therapy school or a member of a professional massage therapy association). Also not included in the term "health spa" are facilities operated by nonprofit organizations, facilities wholly owned and operated by a licensed physician at which such physician is engaged in the practice of medicine, or any establishment operated by a health care facility, hospital, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing care facility. 
Heliport means an area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the landing and take off of helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities, such as, parking, waiting room, fueling, and maintenance equipment. 
Helistop means a heliport, but without auxiliary facilities, such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Home occupation means any use, occupation or activity conducted entirely within the dwelling by the residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes and does not change the character thereof. 
Hospital means an institution licensed by the state and providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily in-patients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient facilities, or training facilities. 
Household pet means an animal which is customarily kept for company or pleasure within a home or yard which is not exhibited to the public, nor raised for commercial purposes. The term "household pet" includes domestic canines, felines, tropical birds, fish, rabbits, rodents, and other animals customarily sold in pet stores. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. The term "impervious cover" includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools, and any concrete or asphalt. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface, which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Inoperable vehicle means any motorized vehicle, other than those vehicles temporarily disabled incapable of immediately being driven. Any motorized vehicle without a current vehicle registration tag shall be considered an inoperable vehicle. 
Institutional residential living and care facilities means an umbrella term that encompasses the following uses as specifically defined in this chapter: assisted living facility, intermediate care home, nursing home, and personal care home. 
Intermediate care home means a facility which admits residents on medical referral. It maintains the services and facilities for institutional care and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will provide continuing supervision, including emergencies. It complies with rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. The term "intermediate care" means the provision of food, including special diets when required, shelter, laundry, and personal care services, such as help with dressing, getting in and out of bed, bathing, feeding, medications, and similar assistance, and such services being under appropriate licensed supervision. The term "intermediate care" does not normally include providing care for bed patients, except on an emergency or temporary basis. 
Junk means scrap or waste material of any kind or nature collected for resale, disposal, or storage, or by accumulation. 
Junkyard, salvage yard mean any property involving the abandonment, parking, storage or disassembly of junked or inoperable vehicles or junked machinery, the abandonment, storage, sale, or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators and/or other old household appliances, used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials, used paper, rags or other scrap materials. 
Kennel means any facility used for the purpose of commercial boarding or sale of domestic animals or pets such as dogs and cats, and any other customarily incidental treatment of the animals, such as, grooming, cleaning, selling of pet supplies, or otherwise. 
Kitchen means any room or part of a room designed, built, used, or intended to be used for cooking, the preparation of food, or dishwashing. The presence of a range, oven, or dishwasher, or utility connections suitable for serving a range or oven, shall normally be considered as establishing a kitchen. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development." 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving, or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate, or result in land disturbance. 
Land disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; any other alteration of land which causes land and stream bank erosion, siltation or water pollution; and any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure. 
Land trust means a private, nonprofit conservation organization formed to protect natural resources, such as productive farm or forest land, natural areas, historic structures, and recreational areas. Land trusts purchase and accept donations of conservation easements. They educate the public about the need to conserve land and some provide land-use and estate planning services to local governments and individual citizens. 
Landfill means an area wherein solid wastes are placed, compacted and covered but specifically excluding hazardous or radioactive wastes. 
Landscape strip means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space, the width of which is measured from a given property line and extending the developed portion of the property line. A landscape strip, as distinguished from a buffer, may be disturbed by grading or side development but shall be maintained as landscaped open space. A landscape strip may consist of grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls, fences or other approved features designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and outside of the development. 
Landscaping means the modification of the landscape for an aesthetic or functional purpose. The area within the boundaries of an individual lot that includes the preservation of existing vegetation and the continued maintenance thereof, as well as, the installation of trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, flowers. Landscaping areas may, in addition to existing vegetation and live plant material, also include in minor quantities decorative rock, bark, mulch and other similar materials. 
Landscaping company means a business engaged in the provision of landscaping services and/or the wholesale or retail sale of landscaping products including but not limited to sod, trees, landscaping timbers, and earth covering materials. The processing of wood into timbers, mulch, and/or chips is considered an incidental use of a landscaping company whose primary purpose is the wholesale or retail sale of landscaping products. 
Laundromat means a facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. A laundromat is considered a personal service establishment. 
Loading and unloading space means a space, typically with dimensions of 12 feet by at least 40 feet, logically and conveniently located for pickups and/or deliveries or for loading and/or unloading, scaled to delivery vehicles to be used, and accessible to such vehicles. 
Lodging service means a facility that offers temporary shelter accommodations, or place for such shelter, open to the public for a fee, including, but not limited to, inns, hotels, motels, and motor hotels, and roominghouse and boardinghouses. Bed and breakfast inns are not considered to be lodging services. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a use, building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 

Lot Definitions

Types of Lots
(1)  Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at the intersection. 
(2)  Lot coverage, maximum, means the percentage of a given lot that may be occupied by all principal and accessory buildings and structures on such lot, measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings and structures on the lot. 
(3)  Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. 
(4)  Lot, double frontage, means any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets. 
(5)  Lot, frontage, means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street, or an approved private street. 
(6)  Lot of record means a parcel of land within the city limits which was properly platted and recorded in the Clerk of Forsyth County's Plat and Deed records as of January 21, 1986, or which has been lawfully subdivided in accordance with this chapter and the subdivision regulations since January 21, 1986, or which was lawfully subdivided prior to annexation into the city limits. 
(7)  Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum required front yard (regulatory front building set back) line. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight-body feet or more in width or 40-body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of the term "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 USC 5401 through 5445). 
Manufactured home park means a parcel of land or any portion thereof under which has been designed, planned, or improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings, and facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on such property. 
Manufactured home space means a parcel of land within a manufactured home park which is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual manufactured home and accessory structures for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufacturing, processing, assembling, means the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The land uses engaged in these activities are usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power-driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered under this definition if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials, such as, lubricating oils, plastic resins, or liquors. 
Metal buildings shall mean buildings in which the exterior walls are more than 50 percent metal, or in which the exterior wall facing the main entrance or facing any road is made of metal, and which said buildings are not used for the sole purpose of storage. 
Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as, a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting streets. 
Miniwarehouse. See Self-service storage facility. 
Mixed-use development means a single building containing more than one type of land use; or a single development of more than one building and use, where the different types of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified complementary whole. 

Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, and when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; and which has not been inspected and approved as meeting the requirements of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 USC 5401 through 5445). 
Modular home means any structure or component thereof, designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site, and which is designed and constructed to conform to the local building code rather than a national housing or construction code. 
Museum means a building having public significance by reason of its architecture or former use or occupancy, or a building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, literary curiosities or objects of interest, or works of art, and arranged, intended, and designed to be viewed by members of the public with or without an admission fee, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public as gifts or for their own use. 
Nonconforming building or structure means a building or structure that does not meet one or more setbacks for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located, or a building or structure that exceeds the maximum lot coverage for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located, or a principal building or accessory structure that otherwise does not comply with dimensional requirements established by this chapter for the particular principal building or accessory structure or for the zoning district in which the nonconforming building or structure is located. 
Nonconforming Building, Conforming Use 
Nonconforming lot means a lot, the area, width, or other characteristic of which fails to meet requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and which was of record as of January 21, 1986. Any lot which was subsequently annexed into the city limits which does not meet the requirements of the particular zoning district shall also be considered a nonconforming lot. 
Nonconforming Lot 
Nonconforming use means any building or use of land or building lawfully existing at the effective date of these regulations or as a result of subsequent amendments to these regulations, which does not conform with the permitted use provisions established herein for the district in which it is located. 

Nonconforming Use
Nuisance means anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses. 
Nursing home means a facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home; it complies with rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Office means a building or portion thereof wherein services are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations and not involving retail sales or other sales of any kind on the premises. 
Office park means two or more buildings which are clustered together in which professional services are primarily engaged. 
Official zoning map means the map, which accompanies this chapter text, that delineates the geographic location of the boundaries of zoning districts established in this chapter in relation to natural features, manmade features, and/or property uses. 
Open air business means any commercial establishment with the principal use of displaying products in an area exposed to open air on three or more sides, including but not limited to rock yards, nurseries and garden supply stores, lumber and building materials yards, flea markets, statuaries and monument sales establishments, liquid petroleum dealers and tank sales. A produce stand is not considered to be an open air business. 
Open space means, within the context of article XII of this chapter, the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
Open space, landscaped, means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, set aside and maintained as a buffer, landscape strip or other approved open area. 
Outdoor display means the keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, junk, material or merchandise in front of a business, building or establishment or in an area visible from a public street, for display, advertisement or purposes for attracting rental or sales. Such definition shall not be construed as to include the temporary loading or unloading of such goods, junk, material or merchandise to or from an enclosed area. 
Outdoor storage means the keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or commercial vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Parking lot means any public or private open area used for the express purpose of temporary storage of private motor vehicles. 
Parking space means an area having typical dimensions of not less than nine feet by 20 feet and 300 square feet including maneuvering space within a parking lot, to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for a motor vehicle. 
Parking structure means a structure or portion thereof composed of one or more fully or partially enclosed levels or floors used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. The term "parking structure" includes parking garages, deck parking, and underground or underbuilding parking areas. 
Passive recreation means recreational activities and places that generally do not require a developed site. This generally includes such activities as hiking, horseback riding, and picnicking; provided that, such activities occur in a manner that is consistent with existing natural conditions. 
Pedestrian-scale development means development designed with an emphasis primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and building, rather than auto access and parking areas. The building is generally placed close to the street and the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk. There are generally windows or display cases along building facades which face the street. 
Permitted use means a use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal care home means any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. Personal care tasks include assistance with bathing, toileting, grooming, shaving, dental care, dressing, and eating. 
Personal service establishment means a facility engaged in the provision of services to persons and their apparel, including but not limited to barbershops and beauty shops, coin-operated and full service laundries and dry cleaners, photographic studios, shoe repair and shoeshine shops, dance studios, schools, and dancehalls, and travel agencies. 
Planning commission means the Cumming Planning Commission as established in this chapter. 
Premises means a lot as otherwise referred to in this chapter. 
Primary conservation area means an area within a conservation subdivision set aside for permanent protection, including the following: 


 
(1)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
(2)  The 100-year floodplain; 
(3)  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet in width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
(4)  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(5)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
(6)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
Public use means any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by the federal government, State of Georgia, Forsyth County or other county, the City of Cumming or other municipality, or any authority, agency, board or commission of the above governments, which is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as but not limited to the following: government administrative buildings, police and fire stations, public health facilities and hospitals, public works camps, parks and community centers, public roads and streets, airports, water and sanitary sewerage storage, intake, collection and treatment and pumping facilities, public housing facilities, jails, and correctional centers. 
Recreational vehicle means any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis (30 days or less) by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. Recreational vehicle parks may be public or private facilities and must provide utility and parking locations for recreational vehicles in accordance with this chapter and all applicable regulations. 
Recreational vehicle park means any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis (30 days or less) by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. Recreational vehicle parks may be public or private facilities and must provide utility and parking locations for recreational vehicles in accordance with this chapter and all applicable regulations. 
Recycling collection center means a principal or accessory use that serves as a neighborhood or regional drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers, but specifically excluding processing of such resources. 
Residence for caretaker or night watchman means an accessory residence located inside or in addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land, designed or occupied by security personnel for security reasons only. 
Residential district means any R-1, R-1A, R-2, or R-3 zoning district as indicated on the official zoning map. 
Restaurant means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverages. 
Retail trade establishment, enclosed, means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which may include the incidental repair of such goods and products, that operates entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, except for outdoor display or other use during business hours and accessory storage in enclosed, subordinate buildings. These include but are not limited to the following: convenience stores including the sale of gasoline, hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores, grocery and miscellaneous food stores including retail bakeries, apparel, shoe, and accessory clothing stores, furniture, upholstery, floor covering, household appliance and home furnishing stores, musical instrument stores, radio, television, and computer stores, record, tape, and compact disc stores, eating and drinking places not involving drive-in or drive-through facilities, drug stores, apothecaries and proprietary stores, liquor stores and bottle shops, used merchandise stores and pawnshops, sporting goods stores and bicycle shops, art and stationery stores, hobby, toy, and game shops, jewelry, gift, novelty, souvenir and antique shops, camera and photographic supply stores, luggage and leather goods stores, sewing, needlework, and piece goods stores, catalogue and mail order stores, newsstands, florists, tobacco shops, automotive parts stores not involving repair, video rental and sales stores, and watch and clock sales and repair shops. 
Rezoning means an amendment to or a change in the official zoning map. 
Right-of-way means that area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple title by the mayor and council or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities, utilities, and other supporting uses and structures. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond, or impoundment. 
Roominghouse means a building where, for compensation, lodging only is provided. 
School means a public, private, parochial, charitable, or nonprofit educational facility as more specifically defined by this chapter, which contains a building or group of buildings, and which includes instructional facilities for students. A school may include accessory uses to instructional facilities, including but not limited to offices for instructors and administrators, student living quarters, dining halls, and recreation facilities. A school shall be considered a principal use, unless it is operated as an accessory use to a church, temple, synagogue, or place of worship. 
(1)  School for the arts means an educational use not operated by the county board of education that offers or provides instruction in dance, singing, music, painting, sculpting, or fine arts to more than two students at a time. 
(2)  School, private, means an educational use for students in grades one through 12 or for only certain ranges of grades kindergarten through 12, not operated by the county board of education, which has a curriculum at least equal to a public school with regard to the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Georgia. 
(3)  School, public, means an educational use for students in grades kindergarten through 12 or for only certain ranges of grades one through 12, operated by the county board of education. 
(4)  School, special, means an educational use not operated by the county board of education that provides special education to more than two students at a time, including but not limited to the training of gifted, learning disabled, and mentally or physically handicapped persons. 
(5)  School, trade, means an educational use not operated by the county board of education and having a curriculum devoted primarily to business (including barbers and beauticians), industry, trade, or other vocational-technical instruction. 
Screening means a method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides yearround maximum opacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet or that screens structures and activities from view from the normal level of a first-story window on an abutting lot. 
Secondary conservation areas means areas within a conservation subdivision that should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible, including the following: 


 
(1)  Important historic sites; 
(2)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
(3)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost dripline; 
(4)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds, such as, ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
(5)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
(6)  Existing trails that connect the conservation subdivision to neighboring areas. 
Self-service storage facility means a building or group of buildings divided into separate compartments, which may be of different sizes and which may or may not be climate controlled, and which are leased or rented on an individual basis to businesses and residents for temporary storage needs, but where no commercial transactions or activities take place other than the rental of the storage units. 
Semipublic use means any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by private utilities or private companies for a public purpose, or which is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as but not limited to the following: underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water distribution or transmission lines or systems, electric power substations, wires, towers, cables, and poles. 
Service and fuel filling station means any building, structure or land used for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil, accessories, and motor vehicle servicing, except that major repairs, body repairs, and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered motor vehicle servicing. 
Sign means any writing, pictorial presentation, illustration, or decoration, flag, banner or pennant or other device which is used to announce, direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known, and which is designed to be visible from any street or adjoining property, except for house numbers and address numbers and nonbusiness letters on mailboxes. For the purposes of these regulations, any sign not visible from a street or adjoining property or any sign within a business, office, mall or totally enclosed area is exempted from these regulations. 
Site plan means a graphic illustration, two-dimensional, prepared to an engineering scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a lot or tract and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific lot or tract of land. 
Slope means an inclined earth surface, the inclination of which is expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. In this chapter, slopes are generally expressed as a percentage; percentage of slope refers to a given rise in elevation over a given run in distance. A 50 percent slope, for example, refers to a 100-foot rise in elevation over a distance of 200 feet. A 50 percent slope is expressed in engineering terms as a 2:1 slope. 

Slope
100 feet of elevation change over a horizontal distance of 200 feet = 100/200 = 0.5 = 50 percent (also expressed as 200:100 = 2:1) 
Special event facility means a facility or assembly hall available for lease by private parties. 
Story means that portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at the location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the City of Cumming may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
(1)  Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
(2)  Stream protection area means the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to a stream, as specified in article XI of this chapter. 
(3)  Stream, perennial, means a stream which flows throughout the whole year, as indicated on the latest 7.5 Minute Series Quadrangle Map prepared by the United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey (USGS Quadrangle Map). 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(1)  Street, arterial, means, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
(2)  Street, collector, means, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas. 
(3)  Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles. 
Subdivision means the division of a parcel or tract of land into two or more lots for the purposes of creation of lots for development, the rearrangement of existing lot lines, or for the purpose of transfer of ownership. 
Temporary use means a prospective use, intended for a specified limited duration. 
Townhouse means one of a group of three or more single-family, attached dwelling units under fee simple ownership. 

Townhouses (Attached Single-Family, Fee Simple)
Trash enclosure means an accessory use of a site where trash and/or recyclable material containers, or any other type of waste or refuse container is stored. 
Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant having a single trunk diameter of two inches or more which normally grows at maturity to an overall height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
Use means any purpose for which a building or structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Warehouse means a use involving the storage of products, supplies, and equipment, and which typically involve truck transportation to and from the site. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. The term "watershed" is different from (broader than) the term "water supply watershed" as defined in section 113-382. 
Wholesale trade establishment means an establishment engaged in the selling or distribution of merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to other wholesalers. 
Wrecked motor vehicle compound means an area used to store disabled motor vehicles until such time as their disposition (either by junk, salvage or repair) has been determined by the insurance company, the owner of the vehicle, or his legal representative. 
_____
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. A yard may contain a parking and/or loading area unless otherwise specified by these regulations. 

Yards
(1)  Yard, front, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, both spaces with street frontage shall be considered front yards. In the case of double frontage lots, the spaces as defined above shall both be considered front yards. 
(2)  Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(3)  Yard, side, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
_____
Yard sale means the temporary sale of home furniture, appliances, clothing and/or domestic items owned by an occupant of a residential dwelling and taking place on the premises on which such occupant resides, whether in the yard or in a carport or garage, usually as a result of the occupant moving/relocating to another place of residence. Yard sales which do not take place on the premises on which such occupant resides are considered open-air businesses. 
Zero lot line means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides have no (zero) side or rear building setback (or yard requirements) and rests directly on a side or rear lot line. A zero lot line development is one where houses in the development on a common street frontage are shifted to one side of the lot. 

Zero Lot Line (Detached Single-Family Shown)
Zone, floating, means a zoning district that is described in the text of this chapter but not applied to specific property as shown on the official zoning map except by application that is approved by the mayor and council. 
Zoning means a legislative act representing a legislative judgment as to how the land within a city should be utilized and where the lines of demarcation between the several use zones or districts should be drawn. An exercise of local government's police power wherein the local government attempts to balance the interest of promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the property owner's right to the unrestricted use of his property. 
Zoning administrator means the director of planning and zoning of the City of Cumming, or an authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, art. III; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 1; Ord. of 2-16-2010, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-18-2018, § 1 ) 
Secs. 113-3—113-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 113-23. - Administration and interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and interpreted by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for maintenance of the official zoning map. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1601) 
Sec. 113-24. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by the building official and zoning administrator. Such officials may cause inspections of development, building and utility installation work to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the enforcement official in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any use, building, or land development activities. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1602; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 9) 
Sec. 113-25. - Development permit required. 
(a)  A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of land or building to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of these regulations before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading, land disturbing activity or alteration of land or building commences; provided, however, that development permits for individual structures within approved single-family residential subdivisions or for single-family dwelling units on individual lots shall not be required. Approval of a preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations shall constitute approval of the development permit for each subdivision. 
(b)  All development permits shall be issued by the building official only after prior approval by the zoning administrator, who shall in no case approve a development permit for the use, construction, or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other codes and laws. Development permits shall be valid for two years from its issuance. If work described in any development permit has not begun within 120 days from the date of issuance thereof, such permit shall expire, and further work shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1603) 
Sec. 113-26. - Building permit required. 
(a)  No building, structure or sign, except as specifically exempted by these regulations, shall be erected, moved, extended, enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the building official has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  All building permits shall be issued by the building official. In cases of uncertainty regarding whether a proposed building or structure conforms to any provisions within these regulations, the building official shall consult with the zoning administrator for his interpretation and ruling. Building permits shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 90 days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more. In any event, all building permits shall expire and become invalid 18 months after being issued. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1604) 
Sec. 113-27. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the building official is required in advance of occupancy or use of any lot or change or extension in the use of any lot; any building or structure hereafter erected; or any change in the use of an existing building or structure. 
(b)  All certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the building official, and no such certificate shall be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of these regulations. Business licenses shall not be issued until the business conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is located and a valid certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1605) 
Sec. 113-28. - Violations, remedies and penalties. 
(a)  Generally. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to any or all of the enforcement actions and remedies described in this section. 
(b)  Stop work order. The zoning administrator, building official or other enforcement official of the city upon learning or discovering a violation of this chapter or any approved site plan or permit issued pursuant to this chapter may immediately issue a stop work order which shall be posted on the job site and mailed to the applicant shown on the permit or approved site plan. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(c)  Notice of violation; issued, served to applicant or other responsible person. Prior to or concurrent with the issuance of a stop work order, if the zoning administrator, building official, or other officer responsible for inspection and enforcement of the terms of this chapter determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this chapter, said officer shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(d)  Content of notice. Notices of violation shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action, and a date set forth for completion of remedial measures, after which further enforcement action will be taken; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed as an administrative decision in accordance with section 113-48. 
(e)  Failure of remedial measures. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more actions or penalties described in this section as appropriate may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
(f)  Withholding or revocation of certificate of occupancy. The building official or any other enforcement officer of the city may at any time refuse to issue, or revoke, a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site in violation of this chapter until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The zoning administrator, building official, or other enforcement officer of the city may suspend, revoke or modify any permit or approval authorizing an activity or land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the enforcement officer may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(h)  Denial of additional permits. The city is authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits or permissions on any new project or application pursuant to this chapter where the applicant, applicant's business or agent has failed or refused to comply with this chapter. 
(i)  Suspension or revocation of business registration. The city may revoke business registrations, work permit or other authorization for the unlawful conduct of any activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(j)  Withholding of utility service. Any enforcement officer of the city may request or direct any utility service provider to withhold utility service to any property on which a violation is alleged to have occurred. 
(k)  Penalty assessed administratively. The City of Cumming through authorized enforcement personnel may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. A penalty assessed is an action that may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with section 113-50. 
(l)  Citation. Any enforcement officer of the city shall have authority to issue citations and to prosecute violations before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(m)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or any site plan approval or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1606; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 10) 
Sec. 113-29. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1701) 
Secs. 113-30—113-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; APPEALS AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 113-47. - Creation and appointment. 
(a)  A board of zoning appeals is hereby established. The board of zoning appeals shall perform all of its duties and exercise all of its powers in such a way that the purpose and intent of the zoning regulations shall be accomplished, public health, safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall serve as the board of zoning appeals. Four members present shall be required to constitute a quorum. The mayor shall serve as chairperson and shall preside over such meetings, or in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem or other designated member of the board. The chairperson shall not vote except in cases of a tie vote between the other members. In cases of a tie vote and the chairperson excuses himself from voting, then such tie vote shall constitute denial of said motion, application or action. A secretary shall be appointed, or in lieu of such appointment, the city clerk shall serve as the secretary of the board of zoning appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1401) 
Sec. 113-48. - Meetings and records. 
The board of zoning appeals shall meet at least one time each month at the call of the chairperson, unless there is no business to transact, or at such other times as the board of zoning appeals may determine, and all such meetings shall be open to the public. Meetings of the board of zoning appeals may be conducted on the same calendar day as a regular meeting of the mayor and council. The board shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, or in lieu of such rules, the board shall follow Robert's Rules of Order, latest edition. The board shall keep record of its findings, proceedings and official determinations, which may be a part of the minutes of any other meetings of the mayor and council, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and such records shall be public record and available for purchase by interested parties at a reasonable cost. The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. On all appeals, applications and matters before the board, such board shall inform in writing all parties involved in its decision. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1402) 
Sec. 113-49 - Appeals and administrative variances. 
(a)  The board is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged in an appeal filed by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator, building official or engineer in the interpretation or enforcement of this chapter. "Aggrieved party" is defined as the applicant/owner or a neighboring landowner having a substantial interest in the outcome of the board's decision and suffering special damages as a result of the board's decision. Any appeal must be filed by an aggrieved party within five business days from the date of the action complained of by filing with the zoning administrator or his designee at his office in city hall a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. All papers constituting the record, upon which the action appealed from was taken, shall forthwith be transmitted to the board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give at least five business days of public notice thereof and due notice to the aggrieved party and shall render a decision in the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(c)  The zoning administrator may grant administrative variances to any land use or development requirement of this chapter in any situation where the zoning administrator determines the proposed use or development variance requested is de minimus and that the goals and intent of the chapter are being properly served. A party seeking an administrative variance shall request the same in writing by delivery of the request including plans to the office of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall respond to this request within five business days by either granting the administrative variance on such terms and conditions as the zoning administrator determines serve the goals and intent of the chapter or denying the request because it is not de minimus and/or does not serve said goals and intent. Upon denial, the applicant may file for a variance to the board of zoning appeals. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator to grant an administrative variance may appeal the same in accord with subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1403; Ord. of 3-19-2013(2) , § 1) 
Sec. 113-50. - Variances. 
The board of zoning appeals is hereby empowered to authorize upon application in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same zoning district or of permitted or nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship, after appropriate application, upon specific findings that all of the following conditions exist. The absence of any one of the conditions shall be grounds for denial of the application for variance. 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other land or structures in the same district; 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these zoning regulations would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners within the district in which the property is located; 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or general welfare in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonable affect their value; 
(5)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(6)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure; and 
(7)  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structures which are not permitted by right in the district involved. 
In exercising its powers, the board of zoning appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the zoning administrator and building official and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator, building official, or city engineer. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1404; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 6) 
Sec. 113-51. - Conditional approval permitted. 
In exercising the powers to grant appeals and approve variances, the board may attach any conditions to its approval which it finds necessary to accomplish the reasonable application of the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1405) 
Sec. 113-52. - Application, hearings and notice. 
Applications for variance shall be made in accordance with all applicable provisions of article II of this chapter 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1406) 
Secs. 113-53—113-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDING AND USES 

Sec. 113-78. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  In any district where permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this division, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings or any other permitted use may be erected on any single nonconforming lot of record, as defined by this division, even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, applicable to the particular district involved, provided that yard dimensions/minimum required building setbacks and other requirements of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located, or a variance is obtained from the board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  The nonconforming status of any nonconforming lot which does not have a building or structure erected upon it within two years of the effective date of this chapter or two years of its annexation into the city limits, whichever is later, shall expire and shall not be built upon, unless combined with other land in order to conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 801) 
Sec. 113-79. - Continuance of nonconforming use. 
The lawful use of any building, structure, or land existing at the time of enactment of this chapter may be continued, subject to the limitations of section 113-109, even though such use does not conform with the use provisions of this article, except that the use of a principal building, structure or land containing a nonconforming use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use, except that changes in ownership or tenancy of a nonconforming use are permitted. 
(2)  Reestablished after discontinuance or abandonment for 30 days. 
(3)  Expanded, enlarged or extended, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such use is located. 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of the value of the building immediately prior to damage, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot occupied by such use, except in conformity with this chapter. 
Nothing in this division shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building, structure, or portion thereof, declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 802) 
Sec. 113-80. - Expansion of nonconforming buildings. 
A nonconforming building which contains a conforming use may be expanded, enlarged or extended, provided that any such additions meet the applicable yard and building setbacks, buffer and landscape strip requirements and all other regulations for the district in which it is located. This section shall not, however, be construed as to authorize the expansion of a nonconforming building for a use which is not permitted by the regulations for the district within which such building is located. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 803) 
Sec. 113-81. - Buildings under construction. 
Nothing in this division shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 804) 
Secs. 113-82—113-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AMENDMENT, APPLICATION AND PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

Sec. 113-106. - Authority to amend. 
The mayor and council may from time to time amend the number, shape, boundary or area of any district, or may amend any regulation pertaining to any district; or may amend any article or section of this chapter. The procedure for amending this chapter shall be as provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1501) 
Sec. 113-107. - Initiation of zoning amendments. 
An application to amend the text of these zoning regulations or the official zoning map may be initiated by the mayor and council, the planning commission, or any person, firm, corporation, or agency that owns property involved in an application for amendment, subject to the provisions established herein. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1502) 
Sec. 113-108. - Frequency of application. 
An application may be filed at any time by any person or entity described in section 113-107; provided, however, that if the mayor and council denies an application, no new application may be filed regarding the same zoning text amendment, the same property as shown on the official zoning map, the same conditional use approval, or the same variance for a period of one year following the denial by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1503) 
Sec. 113-109. - Withdrawal of amendment application. 
Any application for an amendment to this chapter, official zoning map, conditional use approval, or variance may be withdrawn, at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, at any time prior to final action by the mayor and council upon written notice to the zoning administrator. Any required application fees shall be refunded to the applicant only if such application has not been prepared and submitted for advertisement as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1504) 
Sec. 113-110. - Application requirements. 
Application materials specified in this section shall be required for the following applications: amendments to the official zoning map, alterations or extensions of conditional zoning, conditional use permits, and variances or appeals to the board of zoning appeals. 
(1)  An application form furnished by the zoning administrator; 
(2)  A legal description of the property to be considered in the application. The legal description shall be by metes and bounds unless an alternative legal description is accepted by the zoning administrator. A plat of survey of the property by a state-registered land surveyor shall be submitted with the application; 
(3)  A letter of intent which describes general characteristics of the proposed development such as type and timeframe of development, background information in support of such application, and any other information deemed pertinent by the applicant. For variance applications, the letter of intent shall address the criteria specified in section 113-50. For zoning map amendment applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in section 113-112. For conditional use permit applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in section 113-113; 
(4)  A site plan with all information specified in section 113-111. Unless otherwise noted in the approval, the site plan submitted in support of an approved application shall be considered a part of the approval and must be followed; 
(5)  A fee for said application as established in section 12-113; 
(6)  Applications which require action by the mayor and council shall also require disclosure of any conflicts of interest as specified in O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq. 
Applicants shall submit 21 copies of any required site plans, development plans, letters of intent, and any other application requirements specified by this section to the zoning administrator for distribution to the applicable bodies and/or review agencies. The zoning administrator may require more or less copies depending on the nature and extent of required review. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1505; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 14) 
Sec. 113-111. - Site plan requirements. 
All site plans required by this division shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(1)  Title of the proposed development and the name, address, and telephone number of the property owner. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer, or other designer of the proposed development. 
(3)  Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing relationship of the site to streets or natural landmarks. 
(4)  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths; buildings; watercourses; parking and loading areas; and other physical characteristics of the property and proposed development. 
(5)  Building setbacks and any required buffers and landscape strips. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1506) 
Sec. 113-112. - Criteria to consider for map amendments. 
The applicant, staff, planning commission and mayor and council should review an application for zoning map amendment with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing land use pattern; 
(2)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(3)  The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of public safety or the load on public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities and streets; 
(4)  The cost of the local government in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety measures; 
(5)  Impact on the environment, including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality and quantity; 
(6)  Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the value or improvement of development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
(7)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning; 
(8)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
(9)  The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with the comprehensive plan of the city; 
(10)  Any other factors relevant to the balancing interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against a right to unrestricted use of property. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1507) 
Sec. 113-113. - Criteria to consider for conditional uses. 
The applicant, staff, planning commission and mayor and council should review applications for conditional uses with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the use. 
(2)  The number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
(3)  The amount and location of open space and the provision of screening is such that buffering of incompatible uses is achieved. 
(4)  Ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe, and the effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
(5)  The location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not cast light on adjacent, adjoining or neighboring properties. 
(6)  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are not inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
(7)  Public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
(8)  The proposed use will not have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of adjacent land uses or the general area. 
(9)  The physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
(10)  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
The staff, planning commission and mayor and council may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular conditional use application. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1508) 
Sec. 113-114. - Public notice and public hearing required. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all applications for amendments to the text of the zoning regulations, amendments to the official zoning map, applications for variances and appeals to the board of zoning appeals, requests for conditional use approval, and requests for alteration or extension of conditional zoning. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed application, fees and other information required by this division, the zoning administrator shall cause notice of such application to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the community at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of public hearing before the mayor and council. Such published notice shall include, as a minimum, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing, before the mayor and council, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing before the planning commission if the planning commission is required by this section to hold a public hearing on the matter, the location of the property being considered, the present zoning classification of the property, and proposed action to be taken, as appropriate, such as proposed zoning district, type of conditional use, variance to particular articles and sections, and so forth. The zoning administrator shall also cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on said property one or more sign, each of which shall contain the information specified for published notices. No public hearing shall take place until said sign have been posted for a least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(c)  All required public hearings shall be held by the mayor and council, and no action shall be taken on said applications until a public hearing has been held by the mayor and council. The planning commission shall also hold a public hearing on amendments to the official zoning map, requests for conditional use approval, and requests for alteration or extension of conditional zoning, but the planning commission shall not have review authority and shall not be required to advertise for or hold public hearings for appeals, variances, and amendments to the text of these zoning regulations. Public hearings regarding variances and appeals shall be held by the board of zoning appeals, and no action shall be taken on said applications until a public hearing has been held by the board of zoning appeals. Public hearings on applications to amend the text of these zoning regulations shall be held by the mayor and council. 
(d)  Public hearings may be delayed, rescheduled, or continued at another time and date; provided announcement is given at the time and place of the initially scheduled and advertised public hearing; and provided such date, time and location of the public hearing to be delayed, rescheduled or continued is given. A delay, rescheduling or continuance of a public hearing may be granted for good cause by the planning commission, mayor and council, or board of zoning appeals upon request from the applicant, request from the zoning administrator, or upon motion of the planning commission, mayor and council, or board of zoning appeals. Any additional advertising or signage costs incurred as a result of a delay, rescheduling or continuance shall be borne by the applicant. The failure of the applicant to attend or be represented at a public hearing may be grounds for denial by the mayor and council or board of zoning appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1509; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 7) 
Sec. 113-115. - Recommendation by zoning administrator. 
The zoning administrator will, as appropriate, customarily submit to the recommending and/or decision making body, prior to a scheduled public hearing, copies of the site plan and letter of intent along with a written recommendation for approval, disapproval, deferral, withdrawal or other recommendation. Such recommendation shall include reasons for said recommendations, considered within the context of the appropriate criteria as specified by this division. The recommendations of the zoning administrator shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the mayor and council. Copies of the zoning administrator's recommendations shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the appropriate bodies and at the public hearing. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1510) 
Sec. 113-116. - Planning commission recommendation. 
(a)  Prior to the public hearing held by the mayor and council or the board of zoning appeals, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all amendments to the official zoning map, conditional use permit applications, and applications for alteration or extension of conditional zoning. 
(b)  After completing its studies of the particular application, the planning commission shall submit a recommended action in writing to the mayor and council. The planning commission may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the planning commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the mayor and council or the board of zoning appeals. Copies of the planning commission's recommendations and reports shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the mayor and council and at the public hearing before the mayor and council. 
(c)  For applications for which the planning commission has review authority, it shall have 30 days within which to submit its recommendations. The mayor and council shall not take action on any of said applications, until it has received the recommendation of the planning commission within the specified time period. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed application. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1511; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 8) 
Sec. 113-117. - Conduct of public hearings. 
All public hearings regarding applications considered by the board of zoning appeals, planning commission and the mayor and council shall be held in accordance with any procedures adopted by such body and, in addition, shall be governed by the following procedure: 
(1)  The presiding officer shall open the hearing by stating the specific application being considered at the public hearing. At this time the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. 
(2)  The zoning administrator will present a description of the proposed application, any applicable background material, his recommendation regarding action on said application as appropriate, and the recommendations and reports of the planning commission as appropriate. 
(3)  The applicant will be asked to speak first, followed by other persons, if any, in support of the application. In order for a person in attendance to speak, the chair must recognize him. Upon rising to speak the person recognized will first identify himself. The chair may also request that the person furnish a home or business street address, as appropriate. Persons speaking in favor of the application shall be allowed ten minutes total time for their initial presentation. The chair may extend this time in his discretion. 
(4)  Persons who oppose the application will be asked to comment next in the same manner as identified in subsection (3) of this section. Persons speaking in opposition to an application shall be allowed ten minutes total time for their presentation. The chair may extend this time in his discretion. 
(5)  The applicant and/or representative of the applicant shall have no more than two minutes to present summary or rebuttal remarks, if any. The chair may extend this time in his discretion. 
(6)  Upon the completion of any comments from interested parties and the applicant, the public hearing shall be closed. 
(7)  All public comments having been heard, the members of the body considering the application may discuss the request among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the applicant or other interested parties to clarify points made previously or to answer questions. Such applicant or interested parties may respond upon recognition. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1512) 
Sec. 113-118. - Action. 
After the public hearing has been completed, the mayor and council may take action to approve or deny the request, refer the application back to the zoning administrator or planning commission for further study, or the mayor and council may table or defer action until a later meeting. The planning commission, after the public hearing has been completed, may take action to recommend approval or denial of the request, or defer action until a later meeting. The board of zoning appeals, after the public hearing has been completed, may take action to approve or deny the request, or defer action until a later meeting. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1513) 
Sec. 113-119. - Conditional approval permitted. 
The zoning administrator and planning commission may recommend, and the mayor and council may approve, applications for zoning map amendments and conditional use permits subject to certain conditions. Such conditions of approval may reduce the number or type of permitted uses, limit the nature or scope of permitted uses, restrict certain activities on the property, restrict the number and kind of improvements which can be made on the property, stipulate specific acts which the property owner will perform, or any other conditions directly related to the physical use of land and which are designed to render the proposed zoning or use compatible with nearby properties. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1514) 
Sec. 113-120. - Appeals; manner of review. 
All decisions of the mayor and council or the board of zoning appeals are final and may be subject to appeal only by suit in filed in the superior court of the county within 30 days of the date of the decision. In the case of legislative decisions (e.g., rezoning, conditional use permits, and text amendments), the review shall be de novo. In cases of administrative or quasi-judicial decisions (e.g. variances), review shall be on the record by petition for writ of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1515; Ord. of 4-19-2016, § 4 ) 
Secs. 113-121—113-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP 

Sec. 113-139. - Division of city into zoning districts. 
For the purpose of this article, the city is hereby divided into zoning districts as set out as follows: 

 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 401; Ord. of 3-17-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 113-140. - Official zoning map and map revisions. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of the above-listed districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled Official Zoning Map of the City of Cumming, Georgia. Such map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city or that of a notary public under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in article III of this chapter," together with the date of the adoption of the ordinance. 
(c)  A copy of the official zoning map as initially adopted by the mayor and council shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. The official zoning map may be kept electronically in a geographic information system and such electronic data shall constitute an integral part of the official zoning map, but such maps shall be produced in paper copy and made available to the general public for viewing during regular city business hours in the office of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may make copies of the official zoning map available to the public for a reasonable fee. 
(d)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in the district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be made promptly after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 402) 
Sec. 113-141. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerline, street right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(b)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit line of the city, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(c)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines extended, as indicated by boundary survey, deed or legal description maintained in the official file of said zoning adoption or amendment, if available, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(d)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streambeds or riverbeds, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(e)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately paralleling the centerline of streets or highways, the location of said boundaries shall be determined by using an engineering scale on the official zoning map. 
(f)  Where a public street or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, and said street or right-of-way is also a zoning district boundary, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned public street or right-of-way. 
(g)  In the case where the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the zoning administrator shall determine the location of the boundary. Any such administrative determination is subject to appeal as an administrative decision in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 403) 
Sec. 113-142. - Zoning of annexed land. 
Property annexed into the municipal limits of the city shall be zoned in accordance with this chapter and may be zoned by the mayor and council according to zoning districts established in this chapter. In such cases, the mayor and council shall adopt zoning for the annexed land in accordance with the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, relative to the zoning of property to be annexed into a municipality. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 404) 
Secs. 113-143—113-167. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 113-168. - R-1, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The R-1, Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable neighborhoods of detached, single-family residences in a conventional suburban design and layout at low densities. R-1 districts are free from uses other than detached, single-family dwellings, except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district, and which do not detract from the visual attractiveness, health, safety, and stability of a low-density, single-family residential neighborhood. The overall density of R-1 districts shall not exceed 1.5 single-family, detached dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 501) 
Sec. 113-169. - R-1A, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The R-1A, Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable neighborhoods of detached, single-family residences in a conventional suburban design and layout at low densities. R-1A districts are free from uses other than detached, single-family dwellings, except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district, and which do not detract from the visual attractiveness, health, safety, and stability of a moderately low density, single-family residential neighborhood. The overall density of R-1A districts shall not exceed 2.5 single-family, detached dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 502) 
Sec. 113-170. - R-2, Moderate-Density Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The R-2, Moderate-Density Residential District is intended to provide suitable land for a variety of dwelling types at moderate densities in areas served by public water and sanitary sewer. Dwelling types include detached, single-family residences and two-family dwellings (duplexes). Other types of dwellings, such as triplexes, quadraplexes, townhouses, and detached single-family condominiums may be appropriate, subject to approval as conditional uses and if designed to be in keeping with the character of existing development in R-2 districts. The overall density of R-2 districts shall not exceed three dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 503) 
Sec. 113-171. - R-3, Multiple-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The R-3, Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to provide suitable land for a variety of dwelling types at moderately high densities in areas served by public water and sanitary sewer. R-3 districts include existing multifamily developments in the city that exceed the overall density permitted for the district. R-3 districts may provide for a mixture of residential dwelling types, including detached single-family dwellings on small lots, fee-simple townhouses, attached or detached residential condominiums and apartments. The overall density of R-3 districts shall not exceed six dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 504) 
Sec. 113-172. - OP, Office-Professional District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The OP, Office-Professional Zoning District is intended to encourage and provide suitable areas for professional, medical, and general offices and certain related activities. OP districts apply primarily to office parks and areas planned and developed for office uses. In some cases, the OP district serves as a transition between one or more commercial zoning districts and one or more residential zoning districts. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: an accordance with section 113-182. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 505) 
Sec. 113-173. - INST, Institutional District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The INST, Institutional Zoning District is specifically tailored to accommodate public and semipublic uses in the city which include but are not limited to public and private elementary, middle, and secondary schools, city, county, and state government offices, municipal fairgrounds, hospitals, churches, institutional residential facilities such as nursing homes and care centers, parks, recreational vehicle parks, public land, open space, public utilities, and other institutions and public uses. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(d)  Development and operation. Development and operation: in accordance with the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 506; Ord. of 2-16-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 113-174. - CBD, Central Business District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The CBD, Central Business District is intended to maintain and encourage office and business development in the central business area of the city. The CBD district is distinguished from other commercial zoning districts in that the CBD permits greater lot coverages, building heights, and building intensities. The CBD also is less restrictive with the absence of front and side building setbacks and exemptions from minimum off-street parking requirements. 
(2)  Permitted uses include those that contribute to a pedestrian-friendly central business district and that maintain the character of the district as the governmental office, financial, and commercial business center for the city. Automobile-related facilities and services are not appropriate to this character, and thus, new highway business uses are not permitted in the CBD. Housing may be an appropriate part of development and redevelopment proposals in the CBD, subject to conditional use approval. 
(3)  Rezoning to CBD is not appropriate except when clearly needed to expand the existing CBD in a contiguous fashion and to provide for new development or redevelopment with characteristics that would contribute to the pedestrian-friendly, compact form of the existing CBD. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(d)  Special requirements. Special requirements: Any development involving a new building more than three stories in height, or eight dwelling units or more, shall require conditional use approval in accordance with article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 507) 
Sec. 113-175. - NS, Neighborhood Shopping District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The NS, Neighborhood Shopping District is intended to provide areas for limited, small-scale commercial uses of a convenience nature serving nearby residential neighborhoods as opposed to a regional market. With the exception of convenience stores with gasoline pumps, NS districts do not permit or accommodate automotive uses or other types of more intensive highway business activities, or those uses which are of such magnitude or type that would result in the generation of excessive traffic, noise, odors, pollution, safety hazards, or other adverse impacts which would detract from the desirability of adjacent properties for residential use. Uses within NS districts generally occur within enclosed buildings with no outside storage and limited outdoor display of goods and merchandise. In some cases, NS districts are established adjacent to the central business district with the intention of providing pedestrian-friendly retail districts that are connected to and compatible with the central business district. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 508) 
Sec. 113-176. - HB, Highway Business District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The HB, Highway Business District is intended to provide suitable areas for those business and commercial uses which primarily serve the public traveling by automobile and which benefit from direct access to state highways. HB districts are generally designed so that the automobile has precedence over the pedestrian. Automobile sales and service, lodging, and ministorage facilities are representative uses. Open storage and open-air business uses are also permitted, subject to certain screening requirements. 
(2)  HB districts apply to many properties fronting along certain portions of the state highways in the city. Generally, highway business districts are considered unsuitable for locations that abut single-family residential districts, because the uses permitted in such districts create off-site impacts (e.g., noise, lighting, traffic, odor, aesthetics) that are incompatible with detached, single-family neighborhoods. 
(3)  Due to the adopted policy of encouraging more pedestrian-friendly development in a city that already has significant traffic and congestion burdens, rezoning to the HB district is strongly discouraged. Great scrutiny shall be given to any requests for rezoning to HB. Substantially compelling evidence of the need for additional highway business uses in the city and evidence of the lack of significant off-site impacts upon adjoining uses must accompany any request to rezone to the HB zoning district. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 509) 
Sec. 113-177. - PSC, Planned Shopping Center District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The PSC, Planned Shopping Center District is intended to accommodate a planned mix of retail shopping facilities including retailers within large, single-tenant buildings, along with outparcels for restaurants. The PSC district in the city serves as a major regional shopping destination for, retail goods, dining, building supplies, indoor commercial recreation, and personal and lodging services in the county. Uses permitted within the PSC district also include certain highway business and open-air business uses. The PSC district is generally designed so that the automobile has precedence over the pedestrian, but facilities that safely accommodate pedestrian are to be provided. Development in the PSC district is designed in a conventional, suburban layout with abundant off-street parking in front of commercial buildings. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(d)  Special requirements. Special requirements: When an R-1, R-1A, or R-2 zoning district, or a single-family subdivision in unincorporated the county, abuts or adjoins (i.e., is located across the street from) a PSC zoning district, a natural buffer replanted where sparsely vegetated with a width of not less than 50 feet shall be provided and maintained along all property lines abutting or adjoining an R-1, R-1A, or R-2 zoning district or a single-family subdivision in unincorporated the county. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 510) 
Sec. 113-178. - OCMS, Office-Commercial Multi-Story District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The OCMS, Office-Commercial Multi-Story District is intended to provide areas for office buildings with accessory commercial uses greater in height (up to six stories) than are allowed in other office and commercial districts. Taller buildings are intended to encourage efficient construction which will better facilitate increased landscaping and greenbelt areas and improved aesthetic qualities in a campus-style environment. Due to floor-area ratios permitted in the OCMS district, which are higher than in other commercial districts of the city, off-street parking is in almost all circumstances required to be provided in parking decks. OCMS districts permit a variety of commercial and service uses that support the needs of office workers on-site and, when provided, such commercial uses will likely avoid the need for individual vehicle trips off-site during lunch hours. OCMS districts, due to their greater building intensities and heights, are suitable only adjacent to State Highway 400. The greater building heights and intensities, decked parking, and increased open spaces are intended to accommodate significant development in areas with steep or relatively steep topography, while preserving the original land forms and topographic contours as much as possible. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(d)  Special requirements. Dimensional requirements: When an R-1, R-1A, or R-2 zoning district, or a single-family subdivision in unincorporated Forsyth County, abuts or adjoins (i.e., is located across the street from) an OCMS zoning district, a natural buffer replanted where sparsely vegetated with a width of not less than 50 feet shall be provided and maintained along all property lines abutting or adjoining an R-1, R-1A, or R-2 zoning district or a single-family subdivision in unincorporated Forsyth County. No OCMS zoning district shall be established unless the site plan for the property contained within the OCMS district contains a plan showing a pedestrian and recreational trails network for the proposed development. The pedestrian and recreational trails network shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 511) 
Sec. 113-179. - M-1, Restricted Industrial District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The M-1, Restricted Industrial District is established with the purpose of reserving certain areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities, and access to arterial streets for industrial operations, but where such areas' proximity to residential and other districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. M-1 districts include freestanding, light industrial operations, as well as, planned industrial parks. Certain commercial uses having an open storage characteristic, or which are most appropriately located as neighbors of industrial uses, are also permitted within this district. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 512) 
Sec. 113-180. - MU, Multiple Use District. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The MU, Multiple Use District is intended to provide suitable land for a mixture of commercial and residential development in accordance with smart growth planning as a community where citizens can work, live, shop and engage in recreational activity (the district needs). The goal of any MU district would to be a self-contained community that would provide for all of the district needs or be adjacent or closely located to all of the district needs in order to diminish vehicular traffic. For example, a residential community with integrated office and shopping located within walking distance to an existing public park would meet the purpose and intent of the MU district. The MU district must be served by public water and sanitary sewer as well as having a development-wide stormwater system. Absent offsetting factors such as existing development surrounding a tract that serves one or more of the district needs, the minimum size for a tract to be considered for MU district zoning is 40 acres, unless it is directly adjacent to an existing MU zoned tract and is to be incorporated into the existing MU zoned tract from a development and use perspective. The mayor and council may vary minimum the minimum 40-acre size by up to 20 percent based upon a finding that the tract at issue meets all of the purpose and intent criteria set forth herein. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses: in accordance with section 113-181. 
(c)  Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements: in accordance with section 113-182 
(d)  Residential density and residential services fee. Residential density and residential services fee: Subject to the maximum number of dwelling units per acre as provided in section 113-182, Residential Density shall be set by the mayor and council at the time of rezoning of a tract to the MU district. Residential density shall be set over the entire tract with the understanding that there will be multiple uses within the tract. Due to the increased governmental services that are required for a MU district, all residences located therein shall pay the sum established in section 12-101 on the first day of the month after the granting of a certificate of occupancy or after rezoning to MU if an existing residence. The residential services fee may be billed to each residence as part of their utility bill from the city, but all sums collected shall be general funds of the city and not deemed part of any city utility enterprise fund. Failure to pay the residential services fee shall result in the termination of water and sewer services to the residence. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 510; Ord. of 3-17-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 113-181. - Table of conditional uses. 
The following is a table of permitted and conditional uses by zoning district: 

 
See also article V of this chapter for specific use regulations which may apply. 

 
Note— 
;le=2;(1)  In cases where a use is proposed but is not listed in this table, the zoning administrator shall make an administrative determination as to whether or not the use is permitted in the zoning district or districts in question. The zoning administrator may determine that such use is substantially similar to a permitted use and allow that use to be permitted. The zoning administrator may determine that such use is substantially similar to a conditional use, and permit that use as a conditional use. The zoning administrator may determine that such use is prohibited altogether in the zoning district or districts in question. In making such determinations, the zoning administrator shall consult the purpose and intent statements of the zoning district or districts in question, in addition to comparing the use in question to uses specifically listed in this table. 
;le=2;(2)  In the OP zoning district, within principal buildings of an office complex or use with a minimum aggregate gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more, the following uses shall be permitted outright but restricted as to size and location within a building principally used as offices: Retail trade establishments, personal service establishments, restaurants including outside seating areas but not including drive-in or drive-through facilities, business service establishments not exceeding 2,500 square feet of gross floor area, and health spas. The total space within an office complex or use that can be devoted to one or more of these uses in the aggregate is ten percent of the total gross floor area of the office complex or use. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, table 5.1; Ord. of 5-12-2005, § 2(A), (B); Ord. of 12-20-2005, § 2(A), (B); Ord. of 3-17-2009, § 3; Ord. of 2-16-2010, § 4) 
Sec. 113-182. - Table of dimensional requirements. 
The following is a table of dimensional requirements by zoning district: 

 

 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, table 5.2; Ord. of 5-12-2005, § 2(C), (D); Ord. of 12-20-2005, § 2(C), (D); Ord. of 3-17-2009, § 4) 
Secs. 113-183—113-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTARY AND GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 113-199. - Use, occupancy and erection. 
No building, structure, land, or water shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part hereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations of this article or amendments thereto, including the use provisions for the zoning district in which it is located. Except as otherwise provided for in this article pursuant to interpretation of the zoning administrator, any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district shall be prohibited in that district. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 601) 
Sec. 113-200. - Minimum requirements. 
Within each district, the regulations set forth shall be minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 602) 
Sec. 113-201. - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure shall be erected or use established unless upon a lot of record as defined by this article except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 603) 
Sec. 113-202. - One principal building on a lot. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, only one principal building and its accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot intended for such use; provided, however, that more than one multiple dwelling, office, institutional, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot, subject to setbacks and separation as provided in this article. This provision specifically excludes the erection of any new building or conversion of any existing building to more than one single-family dwelling on any given lot in any zoning district other than the R-3 or CBD zoning district. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 604) 
Sec. 113-203. - Height limitations. 
(a)  Except as exempted in this section, no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, to exceed the maximum height of buildings and structures or the number of stories specified in this article; provided, however, the mayor and council may upon application and approval of a conditional use permit buildings and structures to exceed these height limitations, subject to procedures established in this article. 
(b)  The height limitations established herein shall not apply to chimneys, smokestacks, church spires and steeples, domes, flagpoles, public monuments, observation towers, water towers, noncommercial radio and television towers, electricity transmission towers, utility poles and similar structures. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 605) 
Sec. 113-204. - Maximum density, minimum lot size, and minimum lot width. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed with a number of housing units that exceeds the maximum gross residential density for the zoning district in which the lot is located as established by this chapter. No lot shall hereafter be developed that fails to meet the minimum lot size and minimum lot width for the zoning district in which the lot is located as established by this chapter, except as otherwise specifically provided in article XII of this chapter. No lot shall be reduced in size, and no principal building shall hereafter be constructed, so that the minimum lot size or minimum lot width of the zoning district in which such lot and building are located is not maintained, except as otherwise specifically provided in article XII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 606; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 2) 
Sec. 113-205. - Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
No dwelling shall hereafter be constructed or occupied that fails to meet the minimum floor area for a dwelling unit as established by the zoning district in which the property is located. No existing dwelling shall be reduced in size so that its floor area fails to meet the minimum floor area for a dwelling unit as established by the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 607) 
Sec. 113-206. - Residential occupancy limitations. 
(a)  Scope. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all dwelling units in existing residential structures, conversions of nonresidential structures to residential dwellings, and all existing premises that are used in any way for residential purposes. This article shall apply to all zoning categories within the city and shall supplement the minimum requirements and standards for all dwellings units within the city. 
(2)  This section is not intended to replace or supersede the building code of the city, but rather to supplement its requirements to fulfill the purpose contained herein. In the event that there is a conflict between this chapter and the building code of the city, the prevailing standard shall be that which fosters greater protection against overcrowding, as it is the intent of this section to protect against the same. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of a structure occupied as a dwelling unit for residential purposes shall provide and maintain the minimum areas and conditions in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Intent. This section shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety, morality, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. 
(d)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, terms, phrases, and words shall be defined as otherwise provided in this section, and to the extent not defined in this chapter, then by the building code of the city. The foregoing notwithstanding, the following terms are specifically defined for the purpose of this section: 
Bedroom means any room or space primarily used or intended to be primarily used for sleeping purposes. 
Dining area means an area within a dwelling unit where meals are commonly eaten, including those areas otherwise identified as dining rooms, breakfast rooms and breakfast areas. 
Living area means an area within a dwelling unit used for common social and leisure activities of the occupants, including those areas otherwise identified as dens, living rooms, great rooms, family rooms and TV rooms. 
(e)  Occupancy limitations. 
(1)  Minimum gross floor area. Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of not less than 500 square feet for the first occupant, and an additional 150 square feet for each additional occupant. 
(2)  Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than eight feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls. 
(3)  Minimum ceiling heights. Kitchens, bedrooms, living areas, dining areas, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet. Only that area of a room or area with a ceiling height greater than or equal to seven feet shall be used for calculating the minimum required areas provided for in this section. 
(f)  Specific minimum area requirements within residential structures/dwelling units. 
(1)  Bedroom requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain 80 square feet of floor area and any bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. No bedroom shall be occupied by more than four persons. No bedroom may be used in shifts during a 24-hour period by different individuals. 
b.  Bathroom group accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one bathroom group without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one bathroom group located on the same story as the bedroom, or on an adjacent story. 
c.  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Living area requirements. Every living area shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  If there are no more than two occupants living on the premises, there is no minimum requirement for the size of the living area, but a living area must exist within the dwelling unit. 
b.  If there are between three and five occupants, the living area must contain, at a minimum, 120 square feet of space. 
c.  If there are between six and ten occupants, the living area must contain, at a minimum, 180 square feet of space. 
d.  If there are more than ten occupants, the living area must contain, at a minimum, 220 square feet of space plus 20 square feet for each additional occupant beyond ten. 
(3)  Dining area requirements. Every dining area shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  If there are no more than two occupants living on the premises, there is no minimum requirement for the size of the dining area, but a dining area must exist within the dwelling unit. 
b.  If there are between three and five occupants, the dining area must contain, at a minimum, 80 square feet of space. 
c.  If there are between six and ten occupants, the dining area must contain, at a minimum, 120 square feet of space. 
d.  If there are more than ten occupants, the dining area must contain, at a minimum, 180 square feet of space plus 20 square feet for each additional occupant beyond ten. 
(4)  Kitchen requirements. Every kitchen shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  If there are no more than two occupants living on the premises, the kitchen must contain a minimum of 60 square feet of living space. 
b.  If there are between three and five occupants, the kitchen must contain, at a minimum, 80 square feet of space. 
c.  If there are between six and ten occupants, the kitchen must contain, at a minimum, 120 square feet of space. 
d.  If there are more than ten occupants, the kitchen must contain, at a minimum, 180 square feet of space plus 20 square feet for each additional occupant beyond ten. 
(g)  Minimum total area requirements. The foregoing notwithstanding, no dwelling unit occupied for residential purposes shall contain less than the total amount of area as required in section 113-182 of the city, for the particular zoning district in which it falls. 
(h)  Penalties. In addition to any other penalty, upon the second and any subsequent conviction of a violation of this section: 
(1)  The certificate of occupancy for the dwelling unit resulting in the violation shall be revoked, the property posted, and no human occupancy of the dwelling unit shall be permitted until a new certificate of occupancy has been issued; and 
(2)  Following the expiration of the term of imprisonment and/or probation, a new inspection of the dwelling unit resulting in the citation may be made upon the request of the owner of such dwelling unit. No new certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until it is determined by the building inspector, the zoning administrator, or their designee that the dwelling unit meets the minimum requirements for occupancy as defined by this article, this chapter and the building code of the city. 
(i)  Enforcement. Enforcement of this section shall be performed in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2006, §§ 2(607.1), 3) 
Sec. 113-207. - Minimum required yards and building setbacks. 
(a)  No building shall hereafter be erected in a manner to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, or side yards than specified for the zoning district in which the property is located, or for the specific use if yards and setback regulations pertain to a specific use in this chapter, except as may be specifically provided for in article XII of this chapter. 
(b)  No lot shall be reduced in size, and no principal building shall hereafter be constructed, so that the front, side, or rear yards of the zoning district in which said lot and building are located are not maintained, except as may be specifically provided for in article XII of this chapter and when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. No part of a yard shall be included as a part of the yard required for another building. 
(c)  No principal building shall be located closer than any minimum specified distance between it and another principal building, nor closer to the right-of-way of Georgia Highway 400, than specified by this zoning chapter. The application of buffer requirements, including zoning buffers and stream buffers, as defined in this chapter and established by this chapter, supersede any minimum yards required by zoning district regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 608; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 3) 
Sec. 113-208. - Coverage requirements. 
(a)  No lot shall hereafter be developed to exceed the maximum lot coverage specified for the zoning district in which it is located, except as may be specifically provided for in article XII of this chapter. 
(b)  No lot shall be developed with less than the minimum landscaped open space specified for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 609; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 4) 
Sec. 113-209. - Street frontage requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot, and no lot shall hereafter be created or subdivided, that does not abut for at least 30 feet on a public street, or an approved private street. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 610) 
Sec. 113-210. - Visibility at intersections. 
(a)  No fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting which obstructs the sight lines at elevations between two and 12 feet above any roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines, or such lines extended, and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. In such cases as right-of-way lines do not exist or cannot be determined, said measurements shall be made from points 15 feet from the centerline of the existing road or ten feet from the existing pavement or roadbed, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the restrictions in subsection (a) of this section, the zoning administrator is hereby authorized to approve fences, walls, etc., within the triangular area described in subsection (a) of this section where, in his opinion, such fence, wall, etc. will not cause sight visibility problems for pedestrians and/or motorists, and where the application of the provisions of this section would pose an unnecessary or unreasonable hardship. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 611) 
Sec. 113-211. - Validity of existing conditions of zoning and prior master plan approvals. 
Notwithstanding the repeal of the city's prior zoning ordinance, if a property was zoned subject to conditions and/or master plan approval, including previous planned unit development provisions prior to the adoption of this chapter or its amendment, the existing conditions of zoning and any shall continue to apply to said property, until or unless amended by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 612; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 5) 
Secs. 113-212—113-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

Sec. 113-233. - Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles and materials. 
Except for junkyards/salvage yards and wrecked motor vehicle compounds as may be permitted by this article, it shall be unlawful to park or continuously store abandoned, wrecked, junked or inoperable vehicles, power-driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, used appliances, or any other miscellaneous scrap material in quantity that is visible from a public street or adjacent or abutting property. No such storage shall be allowed in front yards. Appropriate screening as determined by the zoning administrator based upon the elevations and uses of surrounding properties may be used to comply with this provision in side and rear yards. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 701) 
Sec. 113-234. - Accessory apartments. 
In zoning districts where permitted, accessory apartments shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Only one attached accessory apartment shall be permitted on a lot, and an accessory apartment shall not be permitted in conjunction with a home occupation. 
(2)  One additional off-street parking space is required and shall be provided, which must be located in a side or rear yard. 
(3)  At least 400 square feet of heated floor area shall be provided per occupant. The heated floor area for an accessory apartment shall be at least 400 square feet and shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or the size of the principal dwelling, whichever is less. 
(4)  Any additions to accommodate accessory apartments shall have exterior finishes or architectural treatments (e.g., brick, wood, stucco, etc.) of an appearance substantially similar to those on the principal dwelling. 
(5)  The county health department must certify that existing or proposed water, sanitary sewer, and/or septic tank facilities are adequate to serve both the principal dwelling and the accessory apartment. 
(6)  Unless incorporated into an existing accessory structure, such as a garage, detached accessory apartments shall be allowed in rear yards only and shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from any property line. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 702) 
Sec. 113-235. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only in side or rear yards, unless otherwise specifically provided by this article. Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only if they meet the following: 
(1)  No accessory building shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(2)  Only two accessory buildings shall be permitted on a residential lot. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from any lot line. 
(4)  Where an accessory building is structurally attached to the principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations applicable to the principal building. 
(5)  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both streets. 
(6)  Accessory buildings in residential districts shall not be used for any type of commercial operation, whether permanent, part-time or as part of a home occupation. 
(7)  No accessory building on a residential lot shall exceed a height of 20 feet. 
(8)  Detached accessory buildings shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the principal building on a lot. 
(9)  In no instance shall an accessory building exceed the gross ground floor area of the principal building. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 703) 
Sec. 113-236. - Automobile sales establishments. 
Establishments that sell, rent, or lease automobiles or other vehicles must provide parking specifically identified and devoted to customers. Adequate space must be allocated, specifically identified, and reserved on the site for the unloading of vehicles brought to the site by truck or car carrier. It shall be a violation to park vehicles for sale, rent, or lease in designated customer parking or unloading areas. When abutting a residential zoning district or office-professional district, automobile sales establishments shall require submittal to and approval by the zoning administrator of a photometric plan for lighting to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. Establishments that will not operate during darkness and that have no outdoor lighting other than incidental security lighting shall not be required to submit a photometric plan. Outside loudspeakers shall not be permitted on lots abutting residential zoning districts; digital pagers or other means must be used to communicate between employees in the office and on the premises. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 704) 
Sec. 113-237. - Commercial recreational facilities, outdoor. 
Outdoor commercial recreational facilities are typically accompanied by substantial off-site impacts. Such uses require a minimum lot area of two acres, a minimum building setback of 100 feet, and a natural undisturbed buffer replanted where sparsely vegetated of at least 50 feet adjacent to side and rear property lines. Uses that propose night lighting other than incidental security lighting shall be required to submit a photometric plan to enable the evaluation of impacts from illumination. A written evaluation of noise impacts is required at the time the following conditional uses are considered: stadiums, amphitheaters, firearms shooting ranges and turkey shoots, and race tracks for animals and motor driven vehicles; such projects may be required to construct noise attenuation walls or otherwise address off-site noise impacts. Traffic impact statements are required for stadiums, amphitheaters, racetracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, and recreational vehicle parks. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 705) 
Sec. 113-238. - Community recreation. 
In districts where permitted, community recreation facilities as defined shall be set back at least 50 feet from any property line, and within the 50-foot setback required along side and rear property lines, a minimum 25-foot-wide natural buffer shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 706) 
Sec. 113-239. - Manufactured homes/temporary structures/metal buildings/construction field office. 
Manufactured homes, metal buildings and structures, other temporary structures, or any structure not located on a permanent foundation, shall not be occupied as a permanent office or for any other use in any district; provided, however, that such manufactured homes, metal buildings and structures, temporary structures and construction field offices may be used for a temporary office or other permitted nonresidential use, subject to the following: 
(1)  Approval by the zoning administrator and issuance of a permit by the building official; 
(2)  The permit shall be temporary but renewable once after a period of six months, with a showing of documented construction delays and a good faith effort by the applicant to progress forward on construction; 
(3)  The permit shall only be issued if plans and permit have been approved for one or more permanent buildings on the subject property; 
(4)  Adequate water and sewage disposal for the structure is approved by the county health department or its designee; and 
(5)  The manufactured home or temporary structure shall be removed upon the establishment of the appropriate permanent building or structure intended for such use, or the expiration of time for its permissible use pursuant to this section. 
The foregoing notwithstanding, nothing contained herein shall restrict the use of metal buildings and structures for use in accordance with the following: 
(a)  An approved mini-storage facility located in and built pursuant to all applicable zoning codes and building regulations; 
(b)  Residentially zoned lots for uses related to the residential character of the property. Examples of such uses include carports, tool sheds, and storage sheds. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 707; Ord. of 9-18-2018, § 2 ) 
Sec. 113-240. - Day care centers. 
In districts where permitted, day care centers shall have at least 150 square feet of outdoor play area and at least 35 square feet of indoor space provided for each child or other person served. The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of four feet. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 708) 
Sec. 113-241. - Drive-through facilities. 
In districts where permitted, drive-through facilities shall not be located within 50 feet of public rights-of-way or within 50 feet of a residential zoning district. Stacking lanes for drive-through facilities must be designed in a manner so that vehicle queuing does not interfere with access driveways, interparcel connections, or maneuverability in and out of off-street parking spaces. Stacking lanes shall be clearly identified through the use of curbing, striping, landscaping, and/or signs, and stacking lanes for fast food establishments shall provide a means for vehicles to escape from the drive-through queuing stream. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 709) 
Sec. 113-242. - Dwellings, single-family attached (townhouses). 
Notwithstanding dimensional requirements to the contrary, in zoning districts where permitted, fee simple townhouses shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Each platted lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage on a public road, or if approved by the mayor and council, a private road that meets public street standards of the city. 
(2)  Zero lot line between units within the same building shall be permitted, subject to applicable fire and building codes. 
(3)  To avoid a monotonous appearance, no more than six townhouse units shall be included in any one building. Any building containing more than three units with common walls must have the roof of each attached unit distinct from the other through separation or offsets in roof design. 
(4)  Each townhouse development or phase thereof shall require subdivision plat approval in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 710) 
Sec. 113-243. - Fences and walls. 
All fences and walls shall conform to the following: 
(1)  A permit shall be obtained from the building official. 
(2)  No fence or wall shall exceed eight feet in height, except for required retaining walls. 
(3)  No fence or wall, except for required retaining walls, shall be erected closer than five feet from a public right-of-way or in such a manner as to obstruct vision on a public right-of-way. 
(4)  Barbed wire top strands may be permitted in HB and M-1 zoning districts only. 
(5)  These requirements shall not apply to temporary fencing erected around a lot during construction of a building for security or safety or code compliance reasons. All such temporary fencing shall be approved by the building official upon issuance of a building permit and shall be removed upon completion of construction. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 711) 
Sec. 113-244. - Gasoline pumps. 
Gasoline pumps and pump islands shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. Canopies or structures over gasoline pumps and pump islands shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 712) 
Sec. 113-245. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation as defined by these regulations shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Employment of person not residing in the dwelling is limited to one fulltime employee or two parttime employees. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the residential character of the building or lot. 
(3)  No storage or display of products or materials shall be visible from the adjoining street or adjacent properties, and only products produced on the premises may be sold on the premises. 
(4)  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of a home occupation. 
(5)  No internal or external alterations of the dwelling solely for the accommodation of a home occupation are permitted. 
(6)  No chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used primarily for commercial purposes, other than equipment approved by the zoning administrator for permitted home occupations. 
(7)  A single attached business identification sign not to exceed two square feet shall be permitted. 
(8)  Use of a building for a home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of one floor of the principal building. Home occupations are not permitted, in whole or in part, within accessory buildings. 
(9)  A business license shall be obtained from the city prior to the operation of any home occupation. Such business license shall require approval by the zoning administrator. 
(10)  The following uses are allowed as home occupations (not all inclusive): 
a.  Tutoring, consultation and instruction in music, dance, arts, crafts and similar subjects, limited to two students at one time; 
b.  Family day care homes; 
c.  Professional services (i.e., attorneys, architects, accountants, realtors, insurance and travel agents); 
d.  Secretarial services and answering services; 
e.  Mail order and general offices not involving storage of equipment, materials or vehicles; 
f.  Phone solicitations; 
g.  Beauty salons and barbershops limited to two patrons at a time; 
h.  Food catering. 
(11)  The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations (not all inclusive): 
a.  Cabinet shops and/or metal cutting; 
b.  Doctors, dentists or other medical professions; and 
c.  Automobile repair or related work. 
(12)  Trip generation uniquely attributed to the home occupation, as opposed to the normal vehicular traffic related to domestic use of the dwelling, shall not exceed ten vehicle trips per day. 
The failure of a home occupation licensee to comply with any of the above conditions shall be reasonable grounds for revocation of a home occupation business license. A home occupation that cannot meet the requirements of this section may apply for approval as a conditional use. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 713) 
Sec. 113-246. - Multifamily development. 
Any development containing one or more multifamily dwellings, as defined by this chapter, shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Amenities. All developments containing 25 or more dwelling units shall have a clubhouse, swimming pool, and tennis court. The number of tennis courts shall be at least one court for developments with 25 to 150 units, two courts for developments with 151 to 250 units, and one additional court per 100 units above 250. All tennis courts shall be constructed as doubles courts, standards size. If at all possible, they shall be constructed in a north/south direction so as to protect the players from the east-rising and west-setting of the sun and provide for maximum hours of usage. The size of the swimming pool shall be a minimum of 800 square feet of water surface for developments with 25 to 125 units and a minimum of 1,200 square feet of water surface for developments with 126 or more units. 
(2)  Laundry facilities. On-site principal or accessory laundry facilities are prohibited. Each multifamily unit must be constructed to accommodate washer and dryer appliances. 
(3)  Bedroom requirements and occupancy limitations. At least 40 percent of the units shall be one bedroom. No more than 50 percent of the units can be two bedroom. No more than ten percent of the units can be three bedroom. A one-bedroom unit can house no more than four occupants. A two-bedroom unit can house no more than six occupants. A three-bedroom unit can house no more than seven occupants. 
(4)  Building setbacks. Building setbacks for the zoning district in which the property is located must be observed along all exterior property lines. Multifamily dwellings must be setback from private streets or private access drives a minimum of 20 feet. All other interior setbacks for principal buildings shall be as approved by the mayor and council and shown on a site plan per approved conditional use permit. 
(5)  Separation between buildings. No principal building shall be located closer than 20 feet to another principal building on the same lot. 
(6)  Exterior colors. The exterior colors of all buildings shall be earth tones (i.e., color not very deep nor very light). The color white is prohibited. These provisions shall not restrict the use of white, light, or dark colors on building trims. Colors must be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(7)  Landscape plan. Each development must have a landscaping plan prepared by a registered landscape architect and approved by the zoning administrator prior to occupancy of any dwelling. 
(8)  Utilities and street lighting. All projects shall be designed and built with streetlights and underground utilities. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 714) 
Sec. 113-247. - Parking or storage of recreational vehicles; recreational vehicle parks. 
(a)  Noncommercial storage. Other than in a recreational vehicle park or in a commercial storage facility, recreational equipment such as boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, motorcoaches, tent trailers and other similar vehicles may be parked or stored only in side yards, rear yards, carports, or in an enclosed building; provided, however, that such equipment may be parked or stored anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading and unloading. 
(b)  Recreational vehicle park design and use. Recreational vehicle parks shall be designed, built and put into use pursuant to the following criteria that shall govern in the event of conflict with any other portion of this chapter: 
(1)  Only recreational vehicles, as defined in this article, may be located or stored in a recreational vehicle park along with the tow vehicle if applicable and accessory units (such as, a boat towed on a trailer behind a motorized recreational vehicle). No storage of any vehicle, equipment or item not directly related to a recreational vehicle shall be permitted in a recreational vehicle park. 
(2)  All streets and drives shall be paved with gravel, pervious or nonpervious pavement as approved by the director of planning and zoning. All parking pads shall be paved with concrete or asphalt paving as approved by the director of planning and zoning. 
(3)  City water and city sewer shall be available to each parking pad site either directly with a hookup at each site or in a central area in the recreational vehicle park. 
(4)  Electricity shall be available for direct hookup at each site. 
(5)  Cable TV, internet service or other electronic media service may be provided at each site. 
(6)  All utilities shall be under ground. 
(7)  Garbage bins or dumpsters shall be provided of sufficient capacity for the maximum occupancy of the recreational vehicle park. All garbage bins and dumpsters shall be screened and drained. 
(8)  Maximum occupancy of the recreational vehicle park shall be six recreational vehicles per acre. 
(9)  No modular, manufactured or mobile homes are allowed in a recreational vehicle park. 
(10)  No recreational vehicle (or any accessory vehicle, equipment or item) may remain within a recreational vehicle park for more than 30 days during any calendar year and signs notifying the public of this requirement shall be posted conspicuously at the recreational vehicle park. The owner and/or operator of each recreational vehicle park shall keep written records of the date each recreational vehicle checks into his park. If a recreational vehicle (or any accessory vehicle, equipment or item) is abandoned or left for a period of more than 30 days during any calendar year, the owner and/or operator of each recreational vehicle park has the right and obligation to remove the same from the recreational vehicle park in accordance with this article and state law. 
(11)  No vehicle may be attached to the ground or permanently located within the recreational vehicle park. The foregoing notwithstanding, nothing shall prohibit the use of temporary tiedowns to secure a recreational vehicle while it is lawfully located within the recreational vehicle park. 
(12)  All structures located within the recreational vehicle park shall be permitted and constructed in accordance with this chapter and the subdivision and land development regulations. 
(13)  A violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor under the jurisdiction of the city court punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and a period of up to 30 days in the common jail of the city, as determined by the discretion of the city court judge. 
(c)  Approved conditional use. All existing recreational vehicle parks currently existing within the institutional (INST) zoning district of the city shall be allowed to remain in place as approved conditional uses, but must operate in accordance with this amendment from a use perspective until such time as they are improved in any manner and upon said event must comply with the provisions of this amendment from a development and use perspective along with all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 715; Ord. of 2-16-2010, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 113-248. - Self-service storage facilities; miniwarehouses. 
(a)  Area. The minimum lot size for a miniwarehouse development shall be two acres, and the maximum developed area for a miniwarehouse shall be four acres. 
(b)  Storage unit specifications and uses. Individual storage units shall not exceed 800 square feet and may not be used for the storage of hazardous materials or toxic substances. The use of individual storage units for living, sales, or hobbies is prohibited. No individual miniwarehouse building shall be more than 200 feet long. Miniwarehouses, where permitted, are limited to single-story buildings except in highway and central business zoning districts. 
(c)  Access. Access to ministorage developments is limited to passenger vehicles and two-axle trucks (no semis are permitted). Interior drives between buildings shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. 
(d)  Parking. Leasing office parking shall be provided at a standard of one space per 40 ministorage units, plus one space for the facility manager, with a minimum of two on-site parking spaces. 
(e)  Right-of-way screening required. When located within sight of a public right-of-way, fencing adjacent to said right-of-way shall be required in the form of an architecturally finished wall or solid, opaque wooden fence. 
(f)  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage is prohibited unless an open storage yard is permitted in the zoning district in which the development is located. 
(g)  Hours of operation. Miniwarehouse developments shall not be accessible to the general public (excluding on-site managers) between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 716) 
Sec. 113-249. - Temporary classroom. 
One or more temporary classrooms, which may be manufactured homes, may be permitted as temporary uses by the zoning administrator, upon application and after the issuance of a building permit, for a public school, private school, or church. The duration of such temporary use and building permit shall not exceed one year, unless an extension is granted by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 717) 
Sec. 113-250. - Yard sales. 
Yard sales are permitted uses in any residential district, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The duration of such yard sale shall not exceed 72 hours. 
(2)  A yard sale on a particular property shall not occur more frequently than once every six months. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 718) 
Sec. 113-251. - Environmentally sensitive parcel. 
For all parcels designated as environmentally sensitive parcels (ESPs) in this section, the following provisions shall apply, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Purpose and intent. Properties designated as ESP in this section have been previously used as a landfill or are known to pose substantial public environmental concerns. The mayor and council hereby finds and declares said parcels identified as ESP to have unstable ground or other situations that require environmental monitoring or compliance. Environmentally sensitive parcels are declared to be unsafe for building without additional technical review. 
(2)  Designation of environmentally sensitive parcels. The following properties in the city are hereby designated as environmentally sensitive parcels (ESPs). The zoning administrator shall maintain more detailed information and maps, plats, or descriptions of the parcels and areas specified in the subsections below, which shall be public record. 
a.  Parcel number 128-032 of the county property tax records, consisting of approximately 17.72 acres. The property fronts on the south side of Kelly Mill Road near the western city limits. 
b.  The subdivision and area known as the Ridge, as identified in the county property tax records, fronting on the southeast side of Ridge Road and including Ridge View Drive and Ridge View Circle, and which more specifically includes the following 18 parcels as shown in the county property tax records: tax assessment parcel number 26 (47), 27 (46), 28 (47 O), 29 (47 P), 30 (47 A), 31 (47H), 32 (47 I), 33 (47 J), 34 (47 k), 35 (47 L), 36 (47 E), 37 (47 F), 38 (47 G), 39 (47 B), 40 (47 C), 41 (47 M), 69 (47 D), and 70 (47 H). 
c.  Approximately 10.6 acres fronting on the south side of Mary Alice Park Road and also fronting on Buford Dam Road, and extending in irregular boundaries between these two roads, in land lots 65 and 80, 2nd district, 1st section, Forsyth County. 
d.  1.98 acres with 222.64 feet of frontage on the east side of Georgia Highway (SR) 9 north of Buford Dam Road (now or formerly developed as miniwarehouses). 
e.  0.918 acres at the southeast corner of Georgia Highway (SR) 9 and Buford Dam Road, with 200 feet of frontage on Georgia Highway (SR) 9 and 200.1 feet of frontage on Buford Dam Road (now or formerly developed as a gas station). 
(3)  Permitted uses, land reuse study, and environmental strategy. All parcels designated "ESP" shall be subject to the use restrictions for the zoning district in which the parcel is located, and in addition, shall be subject to the following provisions: Any existing building, structure, or use shall be lawfully continued, but it shall not be expanded, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with this section. No new building or structure shall hereafter be erected, and no new use shall be established, nor shall any existing building, structure, or use be expanded, repaired, or rebuilt, until a land reuse study and environmental strategy are submitted by the applicant for said building, structure, or use, and approved by both the zoning administrator and the city attorney. The zoning administrator and city attorney shall have discretion in determining the appropriate contents of the land reuse study and environmental strategy. The intent of this section is that land reuse studies and environmental strategies shall specifically address the suitability of the proposed building, structure, or use on the parcel given its prior use, the stability of the ground, and the potential risk to the proposed buildings or structures and any occupants of any proposed buildings or structures, or proposed use established, on the site. The zoning administrator and city attorney may specifically require the submittal of geotechnical or other engineering information prepared by a qualified professional (e.g., geotechnical engineer) as determined by the zoning administrator which must be based on tests or test samples of the parcel conducted by said qualified professional. Furthermore, such environmental strategy may be required to address toxins, methane gas, or any other environmental issues that are likely to occur or be present as a result of the prior use of such parcel. The environmental mitigation or remediation recommended by said qualified professional may be made a condition of any building permit. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 719) 
Sec. 113-252. - Full-service restaurants. 
Full-service restaurants serving food or beverages utilizing nondisposable dishware must have a commercial dishwasher installed per the 2000 SBCCI International Building Code or the latest adopted edition of such code. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 720; Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 15) 
Secs. 113-253—113-282. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 113-283. - Purpose and intent. 
The multiple purposes of this article are summarized as follows: 
(1)  Establish requirements for multimodal access to development sites, including vehicular, truck service, pedestrian, bicycle, and transit, as appropriate; 
(2)  Establish on-site circulation patterns conducive to safe pedestrian as well as vehicular and truck access; 
(3)  Establish minimum off-street parking and loading areas in proportion to the need created by each use, but considering reductions for the provision of alternative modes of travel; 
(4)  Reduce congestion in the streets and ensure that uses and functions of public rights-of-way are not interrupted; 
(5)  Establish certain maximum as well as minimum requirements for parking spaces to reduce development costs and ensure that excess impervious surfaces are not constructed, while providing for additional parking spaces additions when a demonstrated need exists; 
(6)  To promote flexible approaches to the provision of off-street parking, including in some cases, as appropriate, use of on-street parking, shared parking arrangements, smaller spaces for compact cars, and unimproved overflow or spillover parking areas; 
(7)  To establish design and improvement specifications for the development of parking lots, loading areas, access aisles, parking decks, and connections of parking lots and decks to public streets; 
(8)  To ensure that parking areas will be compatible with abutting residential districts; and 
(9)  To provide for adequate off-street loading areas by applying loading regulations to specific developments at the site plan review stage. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 901) 
Sec. 113-284. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to any new building constructed; for new uses or conversions of existing, conforming buildings; and for enlargements of existing structures. This article shall not be construed as to require additional parking spaces to be furnished for an existing building which is repaired, altered, maintained, or modernized, where no structural alterations are made and the size of the building is not increased; provided, however, that when the occupancy of any building is changed to another use, parking shall be provided to meet the requirements of this article for the new use. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 902) 
Sec. 113-285. - Access. 
All parking shall be provided with vehicular access to a street, and loading areas shall be provided with access to a street or alley; and such parking or loading area shall not thereafter be encroached upon or altered. Except for single-family and duplex dwellings, off-street parking and loading spaces shall have access so that their use will not require backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 903) 
Sec. 113-286. - Interparcel access. 
(a)  In office, institutional, and commercial zoning districts, abutting properties which do not provide interconnecting access to one another make it difficult and dangerous, if not impossible, for motorists to travel between those properties. In cases of new development or major building renovation and repaving projects in office, institutional, and commercial zoning districts, interparcel access for vehicles between abutting properties shall be provided so that access to individual properties can be achieved between adjacent developments as an alternative to forcing all movement onto abutting highways and public roads. 
(b)  The location of vehicular connections across a property line should be mutually determined and constructed by both property owners. Connection of parking areas for vehicular access should typically be provided in the front portion of the site. In cases where it is not possible to provide the connection in front, it may be provided in the rear portion of the site. In the case of coordination problems or any factors preventing construction of an interparcel connection, the zoning administrator will after recommendation from the city engineer determine the location of connection to be constructed by property owners. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 904) 
Sec. 113-287. - Curbcuts. 
Curbcuts for service drives, entrances, exits, and other similar facilities on public streets in other than residential zoning districts shall not be located within 30 feet of any intersection or within 40 feet of another curbcut. A curbcut shall be no greater than 40 feet in width and no closer than 20 feet to any property line, unless approved by city engineer. Service drives that serve office, institutional, commercial, or industrial zoning districts shall not be allowed to pass through residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 905) 
Sec. 113-288. - Off-street loading areas required. 
(a)  On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, dry cleaning plant, retail business, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading of such materials to avoid undue interference with public use of streets, alleys, and parking areas. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved by the zoning administrator, loading spaces shall be a minimum of 14 feet wide, 40 feet long, with 14 feet of height clearance. Such loading area shall be located to the rear of the building unless site design precludes a rear location, in which case loading shall be to the side of a building. 
(c)  One off-street loading space shall be provided for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for light industrial use and one off-street loading space for the first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other nonindustrial use for which a loading space is required. One additional space shall be required for each additional 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for light industrial use and for each additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other nonindustrial use. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 916) 
Sec. 113-289. - Accessory uses of parking lots and loading areas. 
Parking facilities and loading areas shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Parking and loading areas shall not be used for the repair or dismantling of any vehicle, equipment, materials, or supplies. 
(2)  Parking and loading areas shall not be used to store vehicles for sale, except in cases where the property owner owns the vehicle, provided auto sales is a permitted use in the district in which the property is located. This provision shall not apply to the placing of a "For Sale" sign on or in one licensed vehicle, boat, or other vehicle located in a private residential driveway and which licensed vehicle, boat, or other vehicle is owned by an occupant of such private residence. 
(3)  An attendant's shelter building which does not contain more than 50 square feet of gross floor area and which is set a distance of not less than 20 feet from any boundary of the parking lot may be permitted. 
(4)  Upon application, the zoning administrator may approve temporary structures and uses such as tent sales within required parking spaces that are not used on a continuous basis; provided such uses are moveable from the site upon order by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 917) 
Sec. 113-290. - Parking and loading area improvement requirements. 
(a)  Access. All parking shall have access to a public street. All loading areas shall have access to a public street or alley. 
(b)  Drainage. Parking and loading areas shall be properly graded for drainage, and they shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. Curbing shall be installed as required by the city engineer when considered necessary for drainage, although water quality effectiveness shall be a consideration in determining curbing requirements. 
(c)  Surfacing. Parking and loading areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, asphalt, or other dustfree surface; provided, however, that porous pavement parking spaces may be substituted for standard dust free pavements subject to the approval of the city engineer according to standards that may be adopted by the city engineer. 
(d)  Striping. All parking and loading spaces must be striped with paint lines, lined with curbstones, or otherwise permanently marked to designate the space, except in cases where the materials used are not conducive to striping or lining with permanently marked materials. 
(e)  Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night or if necessary for security purposes. All lighting facilities shall be so arranged to prevent the direct illumination of adjacent properties or public streets. 
(f)  Signs. Signs essential to the proper functioning of the parking lot and loading areas shall be installed. Such signs shall not be illuminated, shall not exceed four feet in area, or nine feet in height. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 918) 
Sec. 113-291. - Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities. 
Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pick-up areas in accordance with the provisions of this section. Financial institutions with drive-through windows, restaurants with drive-through facilities, carwashes (automated or staffed facilities), drive-through photo finishing booths, coffee kiosks, and any other uses with drive-through facilities shall provide three stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility. Stacking spaces shall begin at the window or communication/mechanical device (e.g., order board) first encountered by the vehicle user. The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities: 
(1)  Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on- and off-site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building. 
(2)  Drive-through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
(3)  All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of ten feet. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 919) 
Secs. 113-292—113-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING 

Sec. 113-316. - Required. 
Off-street automobile parking spaces shall be provided on every lot on which any building, structure, or use is hereafter established in all zoning districts. Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger vehicles for residents, customers, patrons, and employees, as appropriate given the subject use. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 906) 
Sec. 113-317. - Location of parking areas. 
All parking spaces required by this article shall be provided on the same lot with the main building or use which it serves. Upon demonstration that the parking spaces required by this article are not available and cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot as the building, structure or use it serves, the zoning administrator may permit the required parking spaces to be provided on any lot a substantial portion of which is within 400 feet of such building, structure, or use. This provision shall require submittal of evidence of ownership or valid agreement to lease the parking area off-site that is intended to be used to comply with this division. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 907) 
Sec. 113-318. - Parking plan required. 
Before any building permit is issued, the parking lot layout and area must be found by the zoning administrator to be in compliance with all requirements of this article. The building official shall not allow occupancy or use of a building until advised by the zoning administrator that parking facilities are completed in accordance with the approved plan. A parking plan for all uses requiring less than five spaces shall be submitted along with the building plans for approval of a building permit by the building official. No permit shall be issued for any parking area containing five or more spaces until the plans and specifications, including required location, entrances, exits, aisles, landscaping, screening, surface materials and drainage, have been submitted for review and approval by the zoning administrator. Plans for such parking area containing five or more spaces shall include proper drainage and retention, surface materials, curbing and screening as may be required, and they must clearly mark all parking areas, with handicapped and loading or other special (e.g., compact) spaces also designated. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 908) 
Sec. 113-319. - Minimum number of parking spaces required. 
(a)  On each lot where a building, structure, or use exists, off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Table 113-319. No existing facility used for off-street parking shall be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum required number of spaces, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards, unless specifically provided for in this article. Unless otherwise noted, the parking requirement shall be based on the gross square footage of the building or buildings devoted to the particular use specified. 

 
(b)  Retail facilities with over 250 parking stalls shall require a minimum of one standard size stall clearly marked in yellow on pavement "EMERGENCY PARKING ONLY." The location of the parking stall shall be as close as possible to major building entries. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 909) 
Sec. 113-320. - Number of handicapped parking spaces required. 
Regulations and dimensions for handicapped parking spaces shall be per requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Public Law 101-136, and the state building code. The required number of handicapped accessible spaces, which must be provided on-site, shall be as provided in the following table: 

 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 910) 
Sec. 113-321. - Interpretations of parking requirements. 
(a)  Fractions. Where a fractional space results during the calculation of required parking, the required number of parking spaces shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
(b)  Parking space requirement not specified. Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not described in this article, and where no similar use is listed, the zoning administrator shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, the number of employees on the largest shift, the total square footage, potential customer use, and other expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 911) 
Sec. 113-322. - Reduction of required parking for off-site arrangements. 
Off-site parking may be used in combination to meet minimum parking space requirements; a reduction of required off-street parking spaces on a given site may be permitted by the zoning administrator in cases where additional off-street, off-site, parking area in sufficient quantity and availability in conformity with this article compensates for the reduction, subject to the following: 
(1)  The property is under one ownership, or a valid agreement exists between the two property owners for use of the parking area. 
(2)  Off-site parking shall not exceed 50 percent of the required parking for a building or buildings. 
(3)  Off-site parking shall be located within 400 feet of the building or buildings in which it is leased to serve. 
(4)  Safe and convenient pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or path, must exist or be provided from the structure or use to the off-site parking lot. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 912) 
Sec. 113-323. - Reduction of required parking for mixed or joint use of parking spaces. 
When more than one use is provided on a lot, and such uses operate more or less simultaneously, the total requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. The zoning administrator may authorize a reduction in the total number of required off-street parking spaces for two or more uses jointly providing parking facilities when their respective hours of need of maximum parking do not normally overlap, provided that the developer submits sufficient data to demonstrate that the hours of maximum demand for parking at the respective uses do not normally overlap. The required spaces assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking spaces required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 913) 
Sec. 113-324. - Maximum parking limitations. 
To avoid excessive surpluses which increase development costs and impervious surfaces, parking shall not be provided in quantities greater than 25 percent above the required minimum; provided, however, the following: 
(1)  The zoning administrator may allow parking at a rate in excess of 25 percent above the required number of spaces, on a case-by-case basis based upon the scale and impacts of the request, for good cause shown. The applicant shall make said request in writing which shall include documentation from an acceptable industry publication (e.g., Institute of Transportation Engineers, Urban Land Institute, American Planning Association, etc.) or by a study prepared by a traffic engineer that documents parking requirements. 
(2)  The zoning administrator may allow a land area for parking that exceeds 25 percent above the required number of spaces to be designed and reserved for future parking use. In such a case, said reserved parking area shall not be developed except by written permission from the zoning administrator, upon demonstration by the applicant that existing parking spaces are occupied at a rate of 90 percent or higher for 25 percent or more of the regular business hours in which the business or use operates during a nonholiday week. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 914) 
Sec. 113-325. - Compact parking. 
Compact auto parking spaces may be used in commercial parking uses when more than 20 parking spaces are required, provided the area for compact parking is clearly marked and not more than 20 percent of the number of parking spaces in the entire parking area is designated compact auto parking. Compact auto parking spaces shall be not less than eight feet wide by 17 feet long. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 915) 
Secs. 113-326—113-353. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS 

Sec. 113-354. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is intended to implement rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, known as the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, as they specifically relate to groundwater recharge areas (Rule 391-3-16-.02). 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1001) 
Sec. 113-355. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acre-foot means the volume (as of irrigation water) that would cover one acre to a depth of one foot. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water for a well. 
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the Drastic methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility.) 
Hydrologic Atlas 18 means a map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1989, which identifies the most significant groundwater recharge areas of the state as spotted areas labeled as "areas of thick soils." 
Hydrologic Atlas 20 means a multicolored map of the State of Georgia at a scale of 1:500,000, prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources using the Drastic methodology and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1992, which shows areas of high, average (or medium), and low susceptibility of groundwater to pollution in Georgia. This map is also commonly known as the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. Each significant recharge area shown on Hydrologic Atlas 18 is classified on Hydrologic Atlas 20 as high, medium, or low, and these classifications are relevant in this article. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas means Those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within the City of Cumming. Each significant recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on Hydrologic Atlas 20. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1002) 
Sec. 113-356. - Hydrologic Atlas 18 adopted. 
Hydrologic Atlas 18 is hereby adopted and made a part of this article, as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1003) 
Sec. 113-357. - Hydrologic Atlas 20 adopted. 
Hydrologic Atlas 20 is hereby adopted and made a part of this article, as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1004) 
Sec. 113-358. - Applicability; permit required. 
This article shall apply to all lands within the city that are mapped as significant recharge areas, as defined by this article. No development permit or building permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator or building official for any building or structure to be served by a septic tank, unless the land use or building conforms to the requirements of this article. Prior to a development or building permit being issued, the zoning administrator shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1005) 
Sec. 113-359. - County health department approval required. 
No development permit or building permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator for a building or structure to be served by a septic tank, unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter the DHR Manual) and this article. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1006) 
Sec. 113-360. - Minimum lot size. 
(a)  Within an area governed by this article, new homes or land uses served by a septic tank/drainfield system shall be on lots having minimum lot sizes as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in sections A—F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the county health department: 
(1)  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high-pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within an average or medium-pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low-pollution susceptibility area. 
(b)  Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this section. Within an area governed by this article, no subdivision plat shall be recorded until and unless such plat has been reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator as being in compliance with the minimum lot sizes established by this section. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1007) 
Sec. 113-361. - Uses prohibited. 
Within an area governed by this article, the following uses shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks; 
(2)  Agricultural waste impoundment sites; 
(3)  Hazardous materials handling facilities; 
(4)  Manufactured homes; and 
(5)  Manufactured home parks. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1008) 
Secs. 113-362—113-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BIG CREEK WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED REGULATIONS 

Sec. 113-381. - Purpose and intent. 
This article establishes standards, consistent with the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria for Water Supply Watersheds (Rule 391-3-16-.01), to ensure water quality in the watershed system is not compromised by land activities such as grading, septic systems, and accidental release of contaminants. The intent of this article is to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply, to maintain the yield of water supply watersheds, and to ensure water can be treated to meet federal and state drinking water standards. Because state requirements for large water supply watersheds and water supply reservoirs do not apply in the city, such standards are excluded from this article. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1101) 
Sec. 113-382. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to water supply reservoirs or perennial streams within water supply watersheds. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to water supply reservoirs or perennial streams within water supply watersheds and within other setback areas specified in this article. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, and patios. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated by a solid blue line on a United States Geological Survey Quadrangle map. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed that contains less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Watershed protection map means a map in the city's comprehensive plan showing the boundaries of the Big Creek Water Supply Watershed. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1102) 
Sec. 113-383. - Watershed protection map adopted. 
The watershed protection map, as defined by this article, is hereby adopted and made a part of this article, as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1103) 
Sec. 113-384. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all lands within small water supply watersheds, specifically the Big Creek Water Supply Watershed, as shown on the watershed protection map. In the case of questions arising as to whether this article applies to a particular property, the zoning administrator shall make the determination. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1104) 
Sec. 113-385. - Exemptions. 
The following land uses and activities are exempted from compliance with this article: 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Mining activities permitted by the department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
(3)  If utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer or setback areas required by this article, such utility locations can be exempted from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible; 
b.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible; and 
c.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(4)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas in accordance with the following conditions: 
a.  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission or the state department of agriculture; and 
b.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1105) 
Sec. 113-386. - Hazardous materials handling facilities. 
New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, and which will be located in a small water supply watershed, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and the requirements of any adopted fire prevention code. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1106) 
Sec. 113-387. - Requirements for small water supply watersheds. 
The following regulations shall apply to all lands within the Big Creek Water Supply Watershed identified on the watershed protection map: 
(1)  Maintain a buffer with a minimum width of 100 feet on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, along all perennial streams within a seven mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(2)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(3)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the required 150-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(4)  Maintain a buffer with a minimum width of 50 feet on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(5)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(6)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the required 75-foot setback area on both sides of all perennial streams, as measured from the stream banks, outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(7)  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(8)  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire small water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1107) 
Secs. 113-388—113-417. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - WETLANDS 

Sec. 113-418. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection by the withholding of land use and building permits in areas designated as wetlands until a jurisdictional wetland determination is completed, and to establish permitted and prohibited land uses within wetlands. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1201) 
Sec. 113-419. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means any U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map showing wetlands within the City of Cumming. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States, excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term "wetlands" generally includes swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1202) 
Sec. 113-420. - Generalized wetlands map adopted. 
The generalized wetlands map, is hereby adopted by reference and hereby made a part of this article, as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1203) 
Sec. 113-421. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all lands within the city that are shown on the generalized wetlands map, as wetlands. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1204) 
Sec. 113-422. - Conformity required. 
No development permit or building permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator for a land use, building or structure, nor shall any regulated activity as defined by this article commence, unless the land use, building, structure, or regulated activity conforms to the requirements of this article. Prior to a land use permit or building permit being issued, the zoning administrator shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1205) 
Sec. 113-423. - Jurisdictional wetland determination required. 
If an area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetland as shown on the generalized wetlands map, as determined by the zoning administrator, no development permit or building permit on such wetland shall be issued until a jurisdictional wetland determination has been completed and either of the following occur: 
(1)  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that there are jurisdictional wetlands present on the proposed development site, a section 404 permit is required, and either a section 404 permit or a letter of permission is issued by the Corps for the proposed development; or 
(2)  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that jurisdictional wetlands are not present on the proposed development site, and no section 404 permit or letter of permission is required. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1206) 
Sec. 113-424. - Prohibited and permitted uses. 
(a)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants, and hazardous or sanitary waste landfills, shall be prohibited within wetlands. 
(b)  The following uses shall be permitted, subject to use restrictions for the zoning district in which the wetland is located, within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein: 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife; provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the Unites States in such a way that would require an individual section 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2003, § 1207) 
Secs. 113-425—113-446. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 113-447. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in article I of this chapter. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(b)  Any land development activity within a required stream buffer established by this article or any impervious cover within a setback established in this article is prohibited unless specifically grandfathered or exempted by this article, or if a variance is granted pursuant to this article and this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1901)) 
Sec. 113-448. - Relation to other requirements. 
(a)  The requirements of this article are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and this chapter. Approval or exemption from this article do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(b)  This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article shall be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article of this chapter, other city ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1902)) 
Sec. 113-449. - Grandfather provisions. 
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities, including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties shall be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1903)) 
Sec. 113-450. - Exemptions. 
The following specified activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the stream bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in this section. 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or is approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or is approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the zoning administrator on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the zoning administrator to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the stream protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities that are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the required stream buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the required stream buffer. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1904)) 
Sec. 113-451. - Stream buffer and setback requirements. 
(a)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer with a width of 50 feet, measured horizontally, shall be maintained on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(b)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, within which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. No septic tanks or septic tank drainfields shall be permitted within the required stream buffer or the setback required to be established by this section. Grading, filling, and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1905)) 
Sec. 113-452. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring stream buffers and setbacks under the terms of this article shall include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the required stream buffer and stream protection area; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback. 
(2)  Any other documentation that the zoning administrator may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the purpose and intent of this article are addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All stream buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1906)) 
Sec. 113-453. - Variances to stream buffer and setback requirements. 
Variances from the stream buffer and setback requirements may upon application be considered and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of article II of this chapter; provided, however, that instead of the criteria set forth in section 113-50 for the granting of variances, the following additional provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the zoning administrator finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the board of zoning appeals may upon application grant a variance from the stream buffer and setback requirements of this article, provided that any such approval of a variance shall require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel for which a variance is approved. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1) of this section, the board of zoning appeals shall not grant a variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance in accordance with the requirements of section 113-114. 
(3)  Variances shall not be approved when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. Variances will be approved only if a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted; or in unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this article would create an extreme hardship. 
(4)  The following criteria must be considered before the board of zoning appeals may grant a variance to the requirements of this article: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation, and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed stream buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion into the required stream buffer or stream protection area; 
e.  The longterm and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment as the regulations specified in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1907)) 
Sec. 113-454. - Variance application requirements. 
Applications for a variance to the terms of this article shall at minimum include the following information: 
(1)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries, and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation, and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(3)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the required stream buffer and setback. The exact area of the stream buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(4)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the required stream buffer be maintained; 
(5)  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a stream buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
(6)  A stormwater management site plan; and 
(7)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1908)) 
Sec. 113-455. - Responsibility and liability. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor compliance with the provisions of this article, shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit under the terms of this article serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 13(1909)) 
Secs. 113-456—113-478. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 113-479. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Cumming Conservation Subdivisions Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1801)) 
Sec. 113-480. - Definitions. 
Definitions pertaining to this article shall be as provided in article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1802)) 
Sec. 113-481. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(2)  Provide residential zoning districts that permit flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(3)  Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater recharge areas, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands, and wildlife habitats. 
(4)  Permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(5)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)  Promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(7)  Promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)  Encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)  Encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)  Promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)  Conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)  Preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1803)) 
Sec. 113-482. - Applicability of regulations. 
This article on conservation subdivisions is an option available in the R-2, Moderate-Density Residential Zoning District established in article III of this chapter. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws, except those provisions specifically allowed otherwise in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1804)) 
Sec. 113-483. - Ownership of development site. 
The tract of land to be subdivided, pursuant to this article, may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1805)) 
Sec. 113-484. - Housing density determination. 
The maximum number of lots in a conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Road rights-of-way and overhead utility easements. 
(2)  Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a preliminary plat as required by the city's subdivision and land development regulations, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1806)) 
Sec. 113-485. - Application requirements. 
Developers and subdividers proposing a conservation subdivision shall make application to the zoning administrator which shall include at minimum the specifications of this section. 
(1)  Site analysis map. The applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the subdivision, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The site analysis map shall include the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
d.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as defined in this chapter; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected open space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; and 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(2)  Open space management plan. As a part of the application, or no later than prior to the issuance of a development permit, an open space management plan shall be submitted and reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Instrument of permanent protection. As a part of the application, or no later than prior to the issuance of a development permit, the applicant shall ensure that open space proposed in the conservation subdivision will be permanently protected, through an instrument such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant defined in this chapter. 
(4)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the city's subdivision and land development regulations, unless specifically permitted otherwise by this article. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1807)) 
Sec. 113-486. - Processing and acting on applications. 
An application for approval of a conservation subdivision shall be submitted prior to or concurrent with a required preliminary plat in accordance with the city's subdivision and land development regulations. The zoning administrator shall have up to 15 working days to review and approve or deny the application, if submitted separately from a preliminary plat application. If submitted concurrent with the preliminary plat, the application will be processed within the schedule specified for preliminary plat applications in the city's subdivision and land development regulations. 
(1)  Criteria for approval. Approval or denial of a conservation subdivision application shall be based on the extent to which the plat meets the following criteria: 
a.  All primary conservation areas are protected as permanent open space. 
b.  A sufficient amount of secondary conservation areas are protected as permanent open space, as opposed to being devoted to lots and other uses. 
c.  The configuration of the open space tract is contiguous and undivided, or open space is provided in relatively undivided tracts that cannot reasonably be reconfigured into one contiguous, undivided tract. 
d.  The conservation subdivision meets the regulations specified in this article. 
(2)  Grounds for denial. Reasons for the denial of a conservation subdivision application include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  The application fails to fully identify primary and secondary conservation areas. 
b.  One or more of the lots within the open space conservation subdivision are too small to meet the minimum lot size established by this article. 
c.  One or more of the lots are significantly large or wide, such that their design contributes to an unnecessary decrease in the amount of open space retained on site. 
d.  The proposed open space network is divided, not functional, inconsistent with open space plans of the city with jurisdiction, or does not provide for the protection of the most valuable secondary conservation areas on the site given the natural and scenic properties inherent on the site. 
e.  The proposed open space network fails to maximize the length of the common boundary between conservation areas on site and conservation areas or parkland abutting the conservation subdivision site. 
f.  The preliminary plat appears to be submitted for the major purpose of circumventing minimum lot size or minimum lot width requirements or improvement requirements that would otherwise be required for conventional subdivisions pursuant this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1808)) 
Sec. 113-487. - Open space requirements. 
(a)  Minimum open space. Each conservation subdivision shall provide at least 40 percent of the gross land area of the subdivision as restricted open space. 
(b)  Primary conservation areas. Primary conservation areas, as defined in this chapter, are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Secondary conservation areas. Secondary conservation areas, as defined in this chapter, should be included within the open space, to the maximum extent feasible 
(d)  Contiguity. At least 75 percent of the open space in the conservation subdivision shall be in a contiguous tract. 
(e)  Other provisions. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and nonprotected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Nonadjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1809)) 
Sec. 113-488. - Permitted uses of open space. 
Open space within conservation subdivisions may be used for any of the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, or pasture uses; provided all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1810)) 
Sec. 113-489. - Prohibited uses of open space. 
Open space within conservation subdivisions shall not be used for any of the following: 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in this article; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1811)) 
Sec. 113-490. - Ownership and management of open space. 
(a)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(b)  Open space management plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities (plan) that meets the requirements of section 113-485 and that: 
(1)  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for longterm capital improvements; 
(2)  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
(3)  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the mayor and council; and 
(4)  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(c)  Maintenance. In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners' association, or to the individual property owners located within the conservation subdivision, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1812)) 
Sec. 113-491. - Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
The open space within a conservation subdivision shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded prior to any vesting deed for property or lots within said subdivision. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
(1)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement. 
(2)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1813)) 
Sec. 113-492. - Relationship to dimensional requirements of zoning districts. 
(a)  Density and lot size. Conservation subdivisions approved pursuant to this article shall not exceed the number of dwelling units per acre for the zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located. Lots within conservation subdivisions shall not be bound by the minimum lot size requirements established in section 113-182 for the zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located; provided, however, that no lot within a conservation subdivision shall be reduced to less than 50 percent of the required minimum lot size for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Lot width. Lots within conservation subdivisions shall not be bound by the minimum lot width requirements established in section 113-182 for the zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located; provided, however, that no lot within a conservation subdivision shall be reduced to less than 75 percent of the required minimum lot width for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(c)  Other dimensional requirements. The maximum lot coverage, natural buffer requirements abutting GA 400 right-of-way, and front, side, and rear yard/building setback requirements for the zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located shall continue to apply to development within the conservation subdivision; provided, however, that an applicant may propose and the zoning administrator may administratively authorize a reduction of the dimensional requirements specified in this section, if the applicant demonstrates there is practical difficulty meeting said zoning district's dimensional requirements due to the platting of smaller than conventional lots, pursuant to this article. In no case shall the zoning administrator reduce a dimensional requirement specified in this subsection by more than 50 percent of that required by the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(Ord. of 5-17-2005(01), § 12(1814)) 
Secs. 113-493—113-522. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 17, 2018 , amended art. XIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. XIII pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of divs. 1—3, §§ 113-523—113-527, 113-566—113-571, 113-591—113-595, and derived from ordinances adopted Feb. 19, 2008; and Apr. 19, 2016. 

Sec. 113-523. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Provide a reasonable balance between the right of an individual to identify or promote his or her business, product or message and the right of the public to be protected against the visual discord and safety concerns resulting from the unrestricted proliferation of signs and similar devices. 
(b)  Permit the reasonable dissemination of speech. 
(c)  To forestall visual blight within the city by regulating, through content neutral time, place and manner restrictions, signs such that they minimally detract from the aesthetic quality of life and traffic safety in the city for residents, businesses, pedestrians, and persons traveling in vehicles. 
(d)  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare while protecting the rights of sign owners to expression and identification. 
(e)  Promote economic development. 
(f)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs. 
(g)  Facilitate sign usage such that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with the total visual environment of the community. 
(h)  Encourage signs that are well designed and compatible with their surroundings and with the buildings to which they are appurtenant, and encourage signs that are integrated with and harmonious to the buildings and sites they occupy. 
(i)  Eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays. 
(j)  Preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to live and to work and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade. 
(k)  Encourage creative and well-designed signs that contribute in a positive way to the city's visual environment, express local character, and help develop a distinctive image for the city. 
(l)  Encourage new and replacement signage that is appropriately sized in its context so as to be easily readable. 
(m)  Encourage the construction, alteration, and repair of signs according to accepted and approved standards. 
(n)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(o)  Preserve the public health, safety and welfare by requiring signs that are dilapidated or otherwise unsafe to be repaired or removed. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 1 ) 
Sec. 113-524. - Authority, adoption, and scope. 
This article is adopted to serve substantial governmental interests of correcting and avoiding multiple problems that would occur without the regulation of signs. The regulations contained herein are no more extensive than necessary to serve the substantial governmental interests identified in this article. It is not the intent of this article to foreclose important and distinct mediums of expression for political, religious or personal messages. Furthermore, it is not the intent of the city, nor its mayor and council, committees, or agents, to regulate, in any manner, the message content of signs, expect to the extent of obscenity or other messages prohibited by state or federal law. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 2 ) 
Sec. 113-525. - Definitions and sign-specific performance standards. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the following meaning ascribed to them: 
Animated sign: A sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors. This includes signs that blink, flash or fluctuate lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color; provided however, that this definition does not include automated changeable copy signs as defined by this article. 
Area of sign: The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character from the background against which it is placed. For double-faced signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area. 
Automated changeable copy sign: A sign, usually freestanding, containing copy that changes at intervals. 
Banner: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this article, a banner is a sign. 
Commercial and industrial zoning districts: For the purposes of this article the following zoning districts as described and defined in the City of Cumming Zoning Ordinance are classified as commercial and industrial: CBD, HB, INST, NS, OCMS, OP, PSC, and M-1. Additionally, any zoning district created after the adoption of this article will be classified as a "residential," or "commercial and industrial" zoning district, by the director of planning and zoning depending on the characteristics of the new zoning district. 
Distance: That span between two or more signs subject to a distance regulation, and shall be a radial measurement from the base of one sign to the base of another sign. For the purpose of determining distance between two or more signs, whether any given existing or permitted sign is within or without the corporate boundaries of the City of Cumming shall not factor into whether a proposed sign complies with the distance requirements of this article. 
Double-faced sign: A sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Discontinued sign: A sign intended to identify, announce, direct, inform, or bring to the attention of others a subject that has been discontinued. 
Expression sign: A type of sign, not otherwise specifically defined and permitted in this article, which involves the expression of any idea that could be characterized as free speech, and which is not related to a particular use of land or use upon a parcel of land. Expression signs may include, but are not necessarily limited to signs advocating for or against political candidates, and signs related to issues of public concern. 
Flashing sign: Any sign, except those defined by this article as an "automated changeable copy" sign, which is not kept constant in intensity of illumination at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. For the purpose of this article, flashing signs do not include those signs which only scroll information, even though constant intensity of illumination may not be maintained. 
Georgia 400 Corridor: The space in-between the edge of the Georgia 400 right-of-way and a line running parallel to that right-of-way for the length of that portion of Georgia Highway 400 which lies within or adjacent to the corporate limits of the City of Cumming. Said parallel line is and runs 150 feet outside of the edge of the right-of-way for Georgia Highway 400. The Georgia 400 Corridor is visually depicted on a map maintained current in the planning and zoning office of the City of Cumming. The right-of-way attendant to any on-ramp, off-ramp, or access road for Georgia 400 shall not be included in calculating the width of the Georgia 400 corridor. 
Height of sign: The distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign face. 
Home occupancy permit sign: A non-illuminated, professional or business nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area which designates a legally operating home occupation. 
Lot: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. For the purpose of this ordinance, a lot shall be the same thing as a parcel. 
Monument sign: A freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is on the ground. The width of the sign structure can be no more than 120 percent of the width of the base. 
Multi-faced sign: A pylon sign containing more than two sign faces which sign faces contain cumulative more than 300 square feet of sign face area. 
Nonconforming sign: Any sign that lawfully existed on the effective date of this article but which does not conform to the provisions of this article. 
Permittee: A person and/or entity erecting a sign on the property of an owner and/or permittee. 
Portable sign: A sign which is not permanently affixed or mounted, not including sidewalk signs, defined infra. 
Pylon sign: A freestanding sign that rests upon a pylon or pole(s), said signs to include, but not be limited to, billboards. 
Residential zoning district: For the purposes of this article the following zoning districts as defined and described in the City of Cumming Zoning Ordinance are classified as residential: R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3. Additionally, any zoning district created after the adoption of this article will be classified as a "residential," or "commercial and industrial" zoning district, by the director of the department of planning and zoning, depending on the characteristics of the new zoning district. 
Roof sign: A sign projecting above the coping of a flat roof, above the ridge of a gable, hip or gamble roof, or otherwise located more than 12 inches above the front building wall and supported by or attached to said roof. 
Sidewalk sign: A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located, which is placed within a pedestrian sidewalk, which sign shall not be of a size or configuration such that it blocks or unnecessarily impedes pedestrian use of a sidewalk. 
Sign: A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bringing to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way of a city, county, or state road. 
Sign face: That part of a sign that is or can be used for communicating a message. 
Stacked sign: A pylon sign which contains two sign faces arranged one on top of the other, irrespective of the size of those sign faces. 
Temporary sign: A sign of a nonpermanent nature. 
Time, place, and manner restriction: Regulations to protect governmental interests unrelated to speech, such as size, shape, location, appearance, and number. Time, place, and manner restrictions on signs have a content neutral effect on speech. 
Trailer sign: Any sign mounted on wheels and that may be moved from one location to another, but expressly not including such signs to the extent they are participating as a float in a parade such as the Thomas-Mashburn Fourth of July Steam Engine Parade, or other such parades. 
Wall sign: A sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than 24 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure. The total lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign. Wall signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the square footage of any side of a building. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 3 ) 
Sec. 113-526. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all signs erected within corporate limits of the City of Cumming. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 4 ) 
Sec. 113-527. - Exemptions. 
The following types of signs are specifically exempted from compliance with this article: 
(a)  Flags. 
(b)  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs installed within the right-of-way of a public street, and traffic safety and traffic directional signs along private streets driveways, and in off-street parking lots that are installed per the requirements of the city engineer or his designees, or per city ordinance, state law, or federal law. 
(c)  Street address numbers attached to buildings (maximum letter height 12 inches). 
(d)  Signs erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his duty, such as public notices, safety signs, and the like. 
(e)  Any sign not visible from a public street. 
(f)  Signs pertaining to the time a business, activity, or establishment is open, and conditions under which patrons may receive service, including credit card identification signs or stickers up to one square feet in area per lot. 
(g)  Expression signs (no permit required). 
(h)  Signs notifying the public that the lot or parcel upon which the sign is placed is for sale or lease, not to exceed 15 square feet in sign face area (no permit required). 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 5 ) 
Sec. 113-528. - Sign permit required. 
Except as specifically exempted from the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a sign permit. For purposes of this article, application for a sign permit, a building permit, or a business license may be made simultaneously. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 6 ) 
Sec. 113-529. - Sign permit application. 
Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent in the department of planning and zoning upon forms furnished by said office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(a)  A design of the sign, including designation of the type of sign if specifically defined in this article, which shows the height of the sign, the area of the face of the sign, and the structural supports of the sign. 
(b)  The street address of the property upon which subject sign is to be located. 
(c)  A survey of the property on which the sign will be located. The survey shall include the proposed sign location and the distance from the proposed sign to property lines, structures, paved street surface, existing signs, and right-of-way. 
(d)  The square foot area per sign face and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(e)  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located, and the consent of the owner, or his agent, in writing, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of subject sign. 
(f)  Name, address, and phone number of the individual or entity erecting the sign. 
(g)  The director of planning and zoning may require additional information to insure compliance with this article. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 7 ) 
Sec. 113-530. - Building permits. 
(a)  Building permit required: For any monument sign, pylon sign, or any sign connected to electrical power, a building permit is required before posting, displaying, substantially changing, or erecting such signs, unless such signs are otherwise specifically exempted from regulation by this article. 
(b)  The applicant for a building permit shall submit application materials as specified by the director of the department of planning and zoning, including a sketch or print drawn to scale showing pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the standard building code. 
(c)  Signs requiring a building permit shall comply with all applicable construction codes, including, but not limited to, building codes and electrical codes, which are effective in the City of Cumming at the time the building permit is sought. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 8 ) 
Sec. 113-531. - Process for issuance of sign permits. 
(a)  The director of planning and zoning shall be authorized to issue sign permits which are in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 days of the city's actual receipt of (1) a complete sign permit application; and (2) the sign permit fee. For purposes of this section only, the term "process" shall mean to (1) make a decision on sign permit applications that can be administratively approved or denied, or (2) bind over the decision on the sign permit application to the Mayor and Council of the City of Cumming. In no event, except with written permission of the applicant, may the director of planning and zoning delay processing a sign permit application. The failure to process a sign permit application within 30 days of the city's actual receipt of a completed sign permit application accompanied by the sign permit fee without the written permission of the applicant shall result in the sign permit request being automatically granted. 
(b)  For the purpose of administering and issuing approved sign permits, such permits shall be issued in writing, and may be obtained from the department of planning and zoning during its hours of operation once the sign permit has been approved. 
(c)  The director of planning and zoning shall reject any application containing any omissions, false statements, or which is not accompanied by the applicable sign permit fee. The director of planning and zoning shall deny any application which, in his determination, fails to comply with the requirements of this article, or which fails to seek a variance required for the sign to be permitted as proposed. Any rejected or denied application later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of re-submission, instead of original submission date. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement or omission, the director of planning and zoning shall revoke said application and the subject sign shall be removed. A revocation pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Administrative approval and denial. 
(1)  For the purpose of administering this article, permit applications which can be "administratively approved" are those which, in the determination of the director of planning and zoning, comply with all requirements of this ordinance and which do not require any variances from the terms and performance standards of this article. For the purpose of administering this article, permit applications which can be "administratively denied" are those which, in the determination of the director of planning and zoning, fail to comply with all requirements of the ordinance or which would require a variance from the terms or performance standards of this ordinance, but the applicant failed to apply for any such variance. 
(2)  In the following circumstances, the director of planning and zoning may bind over a decision on a sign permit application to the Mayor and Council of the City of Cumming: 
a.  The director is unable to reach a determination as to whether the application complies with the terms of this article. 
b.  The application seeks variances to the terms or performance standards of this ordinance which will require the approval of the mayor and council in any event. 
(e)  Decisions bound over: In the event that the director of planning and zoning binds over a decision on a sign permit application to the Mayor and Council of the City of Cumming, then the following procedures shall control. 
(1)  The mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the sign permit application request at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and council of the city. At this same hearing, the mayor and council shall hear any and all variance requests related or pertaining to the sign permit application. Public comment on the sign permit application and any variances related to the same shall be limited to ten minutes for those speaking in favor of the sign, and ten minutes for those speaking in opposition to the sign. 
(2)  At the conclusion of the public hearing the mayor and council shall render a decision on the sign permit application, and in so doing shall direct the director of planning and zoning for the city to either issue the permit, issue the permit with conditions, or deny the permit. The director of planning and zoning shall comply with the directive of the mayor and council within 48 hours of the meeting at which the decision on the application was made. 
(f)  Applications which are denied by the city or withdrawn by the applicant prior to issuance of a permit by the city shall have their sign permit fee refunded, less $25.00 to offset costs related to the intake and review of the sign permit application. 
(g)  Appeals of decisions made pursuant to this section may be filed in accordance with section 113-546, infra. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 9 ) 
Sec. 113-532. - Sign permit expiration date. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the construction or installation of the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within 12 months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for a permit after the permit is issued. If an individual or entity desires to erect a sign at the same location after the expiration of a permit, a new application for the sign must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule and sign ordinance applicable at such time. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 10 ) 
Sec. 113-533. - Sign permit fees. 
No sign permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the director of planning and zoning and sign permit application fees have been paid as adopted from time to time by the Mayor and Council of the City of Cumming. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 11 ) 
Sec. 113-534. - Inspection. 
The director of planning and zoning, or his designee, shall have the right to inspect all existing and future signs in the City of Cumming to determine: 
(a)  Whether such signs are in compliance with this article (or in the case of legal nonconforming signs such ordinance as governs said signs); and 
(b)  Whether the signs are in such condition as is conducive to maintain the public's health, safety, and welfare. 
All signs which are found to be in an unsafe condition in the determination of the director of planning and zoning shall be addressed in accord with section 113-537, infra. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 12 ) 
Sec. 113-535. - Termination of sign permit and/or city occupation license. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for terminating the sign permit granted by the city to the owner. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no permit shall be suspended, revoked or canceled except for cause as hereinafter defined. Prior to any such action, the permittee shall be granted a public hearing before the mayor and council of the city at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if sufficient time exists to provide notice to the permittee pursuant to subsection (d) below, and if not, then at the following regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  "For cause" is defined as the violation of any provision of this article. 
(d)  The permittee will be given at least ten days' written notice of the time, place and purpose of any public hearing at which its sign permit may be suspended, revoked, or canceled, with a statement of the reason for the proposed action. 
(e)  The termination of the permit does not in any way preclude the person or persons alleged to have violated the provisions of this article from being assessed fines under the terms of this article, tried under the enforcement provisions of this article, nor does it preclude the city from taking any other action authorized by the Code of the City of Cumming, Georgia, and/or any other action authorized by law. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 13 ) 
Sec. 113-536. - Removal of discontinued signs. 
It is the intent of this article to establish reasonable time periods for the removal of discontinued signs. 
(a)  Generally: 
(1)  For purposes of this section, all signs pertaining to a business, service, institution, industry, or other activity that ceases operations shall be deemed to be discontinued signs. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, "ceases operations" shall refer to those situations where there is substantial evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds; provided further that this section shall not apply to any case where a business or activity is temporarily suspended and there is evidence that the business or activity will resume operations within a specifically designated period. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, the operator of a business or activity discontinuing a lease if any, and the leasehold manager if any, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section and each such person or entity shall be considered individually responsible for compliance with this section. 
(b)  All discontinued signs, with the exception of pylon signs and monument signs, shall be removed within ten days from the date of discontinuance. The director of planning and zoning may permit an extension of this removal period only in cases where special equipment is needed to remove the sign and removal of the structure cannot reasonably be arranged by the sign owner within the ten-day time period. 
(c)  All discontinued signs that meet the definition of a pylon sign shall be removed within 60 days from the date of discontinuance. The director of planning and zoning may permit one 30-day extension of this removal period only in cases where special equipment is needed to remove the sign or sign structures, and removal of the structure cannot reasonably be arranged by the sign owner within the 60-day time period. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the structure of a monument sign, provided that it might reasonably be used by a future tenant or property owner, complies with the provisions of this ordinance, and the sign is maintained in good condition; provided further, that the following shall be met: 
(1)  If a discontinued monument sign contains a message panel that is removable from the monument structure without disassembling the monument, then within 30 days of the date of discontinuance said panel shall be removed and the portion of the monument structure that previously held the message panel shall be covered with durable cloth, canvas or other suitable material for the pertinent sign which material shall be approved by the director of planning and zoning to avoid the appearance of blight, until such time as a new sign permit is applied for and granted and an approved sign panel is installed in said monument. 
(2)  If a discontinued monument sign contains a sign copy area that is not removable without disassembling the monument, then said sign copy area shall be modified (e.g., painted over or covered with durable cloth, canvas or other suitable material for the pertinent sign which material shall be approved by the director of planning and zoning), so that the sign copy pertaining to the business or activity discontinued is no longer visible, until such time as a new sign permit is applied for and granted and approved sign copy is affixed on the sign copy area of said monument. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 14 ) 
Sec. 113-537. - Maintenance of signs. 
(a)  Removal of signs not maintained. All signs shall be maintained by the property owner and/or the license holder in good condition so as to present a safe condition, as well as a neat and orderly appearance. The director of the department of planning and zoning may revoke a sign permit or remove or cause to be removed after notice any sign that has not been timely removed after being discontinued as set forth in section 113-536, or which shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, falls into disrepair, is not being maintained (including regular maintenance of the sign face to keep the appearance of the sign face in a neat and orderly appearance) or in the opinion of the director or his designees poses a threat to public safety. The director of planning and zoning or his designee will give the owner 30 days' written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign or signs, except signs which pose a threat to public safety which shall be removed in accord with section 113-541, infra. Said written notice may be made by U.S. mail sent to the owner of the property upon which the sign is located and the licensee as applicable. If the notice recipients refuse to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the director of planning and zoning or his designee will have the sign removed, and the city shall be entitled to a lien for the cost of removal against the lot or parcel upon which the sign existed before removal. 
(b)  Maintaining messages and copy on signs. Signs may not lack copy or a message for in excess of 30 days. In the event a sign lacks copy or a message for in excess of 30 days, the owner of said sign shall cause the sign to bear copy or a message advertising the sign as available, and shall maintain such copy or message until the sign face is occupied by different copy or message. It is the intent of this provision to avoid the visual blight which accompanies vacant and un-maintained sign copy and/or messages. Failure to either maintain the message or copy, or the failure to advertise the sign as available, shall be considered grounds for removal of the sign and revocation of the sign permit. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 15 ) 
Sec. 113-538. - Relocation costs. 
(a)  As to all signs permitted after the effective date of this ordinance amendment, the owner of the land, the permit holder, their successors and assigns shall and by applying for a permit agree to be responsible for all costs of relocation of said sign and shall waive any claim for the value of the land with a sign located upon it in the event that any road, or right-of-way, or utility easement is expanded in the City of Cumming that necessitates relocation or loss of the sign at the permitted location. This provision does not waive any prior agreements and consents to be responsible for similar charges under prior versions of the ordinance. 
(b)  All permits issued for signs under this article shall be conditioned upon the land owner, permit holder and their successors and assigns being bound to incur said relocation costs and waiving any claim of damages or vested rights in the sign due to road or right-of-way, or utility expansion which requires relocation or total loss of the sign. All sign permit applications and all sign permits shall have the following legend imprinted thereon: 
"Acceptance of this permit and erection of the sign approved herewith shall irrevocably bind the owner of the land, the permit holder, their successors and assigns (hereinafter collectively the "Permit Holder") to pay any and all costs of relocation of the sign in the event that the City or other governmental entity expands the road or right of way or utility infrastructure in such a way so as to impact the sign. The Permit Holder agrees that it acquires no vested rights in the sign on the property location, and agrees to make no claim for condemnation, inverse condemnation or other loss or damage as a result of the inability of Permit Holder to maintain a sign at this location. The Permit Holder agrees that the permit is a conditional license that may be revoked by the City at any time due to the need for road or other utility improvements, and that the Permit Holder has taken all of these factors into consideration when buying or leasing the land upon which the sign will be located and when designing, constructing and maintaining the sign." 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 16 ) 
Sec. 113-539. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the director of planning and zoning or his or her designee as follows: 
(a)  In case any sign is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted, or used in violation of any provision of this article, the director of planning and zoning may, in addition to other remedies, and after notice to the appropriate person, issue a citation for violation of the city ordinance thereby requiring the presence of the violator in municipal court; institute the filing of a petition for an injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or abate such violation. 
(b)  The director of planning and zoning may have the sign removed at the expense of the owner and/or licensee, and may issue a citation for violation of the city ordinance to such person, the person or entity erecting, installing or placing the sign, as well as those parties whose name, message, and/or address, and/or telephone number appear on the sign. 
(1)  Before removing a sign, the director of planning and zoning shall endeavor to give notice of the pending removal to the property owner upon whose property the sign is located, the licensee as applicable, the person or entity which erected the sign, and those parties whose name, message, address, and/or telephone number appear on the sign. Attempting to contact such persons by telephone and/or U.S. mail shall comply with the notice requirement of this provision. 
(2)  In the event that any or all of the aforementioned entities or individuals are not readily ascertainable by the director of planning and zoning, then the sign may be removed without such attempt at notice being required. 
(c)  Any sign located within a public street right-of-way may be removed immediately by the city without warning or notice to the sign owner. 
(d)  All costs of enforcement shall be paid by the sign owner, the permittee, and/or the property owner, shall constitute a lien upon the lot or parcel upon which the sign existed, and shall be paid in full with interest at the legal statutory rate prior to any new sign permits being issued for that lot or parcel. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 17 ) 
Sec. 113-540. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine up to $500.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day for which a violation of the ordinance exists shall be a separate violation of the ordinance. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 18 ) 
Sec. 113-541. - Nonconforming signs and threats to public safety. 
Nonconforming signs that met all legal requirements when erected may stay in place until they are otherwise subject to removal as described this article, including, but not limited to, those grounds for removal in sections 113-536 and 113-537. Additionally, a nonconforming sigh may be removed when deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a threat to public safety, and no repairs have been effected within ten days of receipt or return of registered or certified notice from the director of planning and zoning directing that immediate repairs are necessary to protect public safety. Any sign removed shall not be replaced except through a new application under the then current sign ordinance. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 19 ) 
Sec. 113-542. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided by this section: 
(a)  Flashing signs. 
(b)  Any air- or gas-filled balloons or other similar devices, and permanent signs made of paper, cloth, or other nondurable materials, except as such signs are specifically approved by special permit in accordance with this article. Temporary banner signs made of non-rigid material are permissible when attached to pedestrian lighting fixtures for a period up to 60 days. These temporary banner signs shall be permitted only by issue of a sign permit. 
(c)  Multi-faced signs. 
(d)  Portable signs. 
(e)  Roof signs which extend in excess of 15 feet above the roof of the building to which they are attached. 
(f)  Streamers and pennants, except as specifically approved by special permit in accordance with this article. 
(g)  Signs that imitate an official traffic sign or signal. This includes signs that use colored lights used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(h)  Signs within the right-of-way, including those attached to traffic signs or telephone poles. 
(i)  Signs attached to trees. 
(j)  Signs attached to courtesy benches, trashcans, and similar devices, with the exception of signage related to the ownership of such items. 
(k)  Stacked signs. 
(l)  Trailer signs. 
(m)  Signs which are constructed of materials that are not sufficiently durable to withstand weather and climatic events while maintaining a clean, neat and orderly appearance, or which may pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. The materials to be used in constructing a sign shall be disclosed as part of the sign permit application in order to allow the materials to be assessed for compliance with this provision. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 20 ) 
Sec. 113-543. - Sign devices allowed for up to 30 days. 
The following types of signs shall be permitted only by issuance of a sign permit, and a building permit and electrical permit if required, allowing usage of this type sign for a period not exceeding 30 consecutive days, except as more specifically provided in this section. No such permit shall be issued for the same lot at less than six-month intervals. All signs must be set back at least ten feet from any public right-of-way. A fee, as may be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council of the city, shall be charged and must be paid for each sign permit in addition to fees for any required building and electrical permits. 
(a)  Air- or gas-filled balloons or other devices which have a capacity for air or gas which exceeds three cubic feet, per lot. 
(b)  Streamers or two pennants, per lot. 
(c)  Banners, not specifically exempted from compliance with this article, each with a maximum size of 32 square feet, not to exceed three on any given lot. 
(d)  Four searchlights or similar devices per lot. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 21 ) 
Sec. 113-544. - Weekend signs. 
Weekend signs shall be allowed without the necessity of obtaining a permit, subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Such signs shall be allowed only on Fridays from 12:00 p.m. through Mondays until 12:00 p.m. 
(b)  No more than one weekend sign shall be allowed on any given lot. 
(c)  No such sign shall be located on any public right-of-way, and it must be on private property with the consent of the property owner. 
(d)  Signs shall not exceed a maximum area of 15 square feet each. 
(e)  For identification purposes the owner of said sign shall stamp or write legibly its name and contact information, on the backside or in a corner of the sign. 
(f)  In order to confirm legitimacy of sign placement, the owner of every weekend sign shall stamp or write legibly on the backside or corner of the sign the name of the property owner providing authorization for placement of the sign and a telephone number of that property owner. 
(g)  Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(h)  The minimum fine for placement of a weekend sign in contravention of this article shall be $100.00. For enforcement purposes, each sign placed in contravention of this article is a separate violation. 
(i)  For purposes of prosecuting this chapter, it is hereby established that if the subject matter of a wrongfully placed weekend sign is a business, individual or entity subject to identification, then a rebuttable presumption exists that the business, individual or entity so identified caused the sign to be so placed and is subject to citation. 
(j)  Expression signs: Expression signs are governed by O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58, and shall be allowed without the necessity of obtaining a permit. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 22 ) 
Sec. 113-545. - Minimum setback from right-of-way. 
No sign regulated by this article shall be placed or erected within any public right-of-way. Additionally, no sign, in excess of 30 inches high shall be placed within ten feet of a public right-of-way. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 23 ) 
Sec. 113-546. - Appeals and variances authorized. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director of planning and zoning, the mayor and council of the city, or other official with authority to administer or interpret this Code may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals for the City of Cumming. Unless inconsistent with the procedures outlined by this article, such appeals will follow the requirements and procedures defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. Where the denial of any sign permit is appealed, it shall be set down for consideration at the next meeting of the zoning board of appeals. A final determination shall be issued by the appellate body within 60 days from the date that the appeal is formally filed in writing by the sign applicant. Appeal from the decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be filed with the Superior Court of Forsyth County. 
(b)  Variances to the height performance standard delineated in this article may be granted by the mayor and council of the city if sought by the applicant for a sign needing such a variance. Variances must be requested on forms provided by the department of planning and zoning, and are subject to such additional fees as may be set by the mayor and council of the city from time to time. Variances will be considered by the mayor and council along with the permitting procedures discussed in section 113-531 supra. 
(1)  Variances will only be granted when the applicant shows that the topography of the land upon which the sign is to be erected is such that the variance is necessary for the sign to be viewable or for public safety purposes. 
(2)  Variances will only be permitted to add, at maximum, 20 feet to the height of a sign. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 24 ) 
Sec. 113-547. - Sign requirements per zoning district. 
Any sign regulated by this article shall comply with the requirements outlined for the zoning district category in which the sign is located. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 25 ) 
Sec. 113-548. - Residential zoning districts: Permitted signs and performance standards. 
(a)  Permitted signs. 
(1)  Expression signs (no permit required). 
(2)  Signs notifying the public that the lot or parcel upon which the sign is placed is for sale or lease, not to exceed 15 square feet in sign face area (no permit required). 
(3)  Home occupancy permit signs. 
(4)  Monument signs at the entrance to a residential development or the entrance to a phase of a residential development. 
(b)  Performance standards. 
(1)  The maximum height for signs shall not exceed six feet. 
(2)  Any lot within a residential zoning district shall be limited to 40 square feet of aggregate sign face. Limitations on the allowable square feet of signage are aggregate and may be distributed among any permitted signs (the 40 square feet of aggregate sign face may consist of any combination of permitted signs). 
(3)  No signs may be placed within any public right-of-way, and no signs exceeding a height of 30 inches may be placed within ten feet of any public right-of-way. 
(4)  To the extent that any restrictions contained herein are inconsistent with state law, including O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58, said state law shall control. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 26 ) 
Sec. 113-549. - Commercial and industrial zoning districts: Permitted signs and performance standards. 
(a)  Generally permitted signs throughout commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(1)  Expression signs (no permit required). 
(2)  Signs notifying the public that the lot or parcel upon which the sign is placed is for sale or lease, not to exceed 15 square feet in sign face area. (No permit required) 
(3)  Murals on property, walls, or buildings owned by the City of Cumming as approved by the city. 
(b)  Specific zoning district considerations. 
(1)  Central business district/office professional/neighborhood shopping. Permitted signs include: 
a.  Monument signs with a sign face < 320 square feet and height under 20 feet. 
b.  Wall signs containing coverage of no more than 25 percent of any single given wall face. 
(2)  Highway business/planned shopping center. 
a.  Monument signs with a sign face of < 320 square feet and a height under 30 feet. 
b.  Pylon signs with a sign face of < 420 square feet and a height under 30 feet. 
c.  Wall signs containing coverage of no more than 25 percent of any single given wall face. 
d.  Roof signs. 
(3)  Intuitional/M1 restricted industrial. 
a.  Monument signs with a sign face < 320 square feet and height under 20 feet. 
b.  Wall signs containing coverage of no more than 25 percent of any single given wall face. 
c.  Roof signs. 
(4)  Planned unit development (PUD). 
a.  Acceptable signs for use in a PUD shall be proposed by the applicant for consideration by the mayor and council as part of their proposal for overall zoning approval. 
(c)  Miscellaneous performance standards. Where not otherwise restricted by this article, the following performance standards shall control: 
(1)  The maximum height for signs not within the Georgia 400 Corridor shall not exceed 30 feet. 
(2)  Signs within the Georgia 400 Corridor shall not exceed a maximum height of 1,340 feet above mean sea level, based upon a certified elevation measurement from a registered land surveyor. 
(3)  The maximum square footage for a single sign face shall not exceed 420 square feet. 
(4)  The minimum separation required between two pylon signs shall not be less than 1,500 feet as distance is defined by this article. 
(5)  No signs except as specifically provided for above may be placed within any public right-of-way, and no signs exceeding a height of 30 inches may be placed within ten feet of any public right-of-way. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 27 ) 
Sec. 113-550. - Particular regulations concerning automated changeable copy signs. 
According to research, automated changeable copy signs present additional considerations for the public health, safety, and welfare, in that change in copy can pose a potential distraction to drivers, thus increasing the likelihood of automobile accidents, because they can alter the driver's attention from the road to such a sign. Accordingly, as part of the reasonable time place and manner restrictions, the following restrictions apply to automated changeable copy signs: 
(a)  For each new automated changeable copy sign, including, but not limited to, signs commonly described as "LED Billboards," the applicant must release the permits for and remove two static faced pylon signs. No permits for construction of a new automated changeable copy sign will be issued until such time as the two static faced pylon signs have been removed and any permits therefore surrendered. 
(b)  The foregoing notwithstanding, for any legal non-conforming pylon signs which are removed with permits surrendered in conjunction with an application for a new automated changeable copy sign permit, the ratio of removal to new permit issuance shall be 1:1. 
( Ord. of 7-17-2018, art. II, § 28 ) 
Appendix A - FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS 
The following franchises and utility agreements are current: 
Atlanta Gas Light Company—Ordinance adopted February 15, 1994. 
Comcast of Georgia/Virginia, Inc. Agreement—Executed 2008. 
Georgia Power Company—Ordinance adopted November 19, 2002, as amended Ordinance adopted August 16, 2005. 
Sawnee Electric Membership Corporation franchise—Ordinance adopted March 16, 2006. 
Water and Sewer Service Agreement with Forsyth County—Ordinance adopted [date unspecified]. 
Intergovernmental Agreement for the Allocation and Distribution of Proceeds from the Energy Excise Tax with Forsyth County—Ordinance adopted October 18, 2012. 
Intergovernmental Agreement regarding Housing of City Inmates at the Forsyth County Jail— Ordinance adopted September 3, 2015 . 
Statewide Mutual Aid and Assistance Agreement— Adopted June 21, 2016 . 
First Amendment to Intergovernmental Agreement regarding 911 Services— Adopted August 4, 2016 . 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1998 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1998 Code, which Code embraced ordinances adopted through December 16, 1997. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of ordinances codified in the Code. Ordinances adopted on or before December 16, 1997 were found in the city's 1998 Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 